  ELECTRIC  MACHINERY  FUNDAMENTALS   ELECTRIC  MACHINERY  FUNDAMENTALS  FO U RTH EDITIO N  Stephen J. Chapman  BAE SYSTEMS Australia  Higher Education  Boston Burr Ridge, IL Dubuque, IA Madison, W I New York  San Francisco SI. louis Bangkok Bogota Caracas Kua la lumpur  Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan Montreal New De lhi  Santiago Seoul Singapore Sydney Taipei Toronto  • Higher Education  ELE CTR IC M AC HIN ERY RJNDAMENTALS. FOURT H EDITION  Published by M cGraw- H ill. a business unit 
of Th e M cGraw- H ill Companies. Inc., 1221 Avenue of  the Americas, N ew Yort. NY 10020. Copyright 0 2005, 1999. 1991. 1985 by The M cGraw, H ill  Companies. Inc. All rights reserved. N o part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in  any form or by any means. or stored in a database or retrieval system. without the prior written con'  sent of Th e M cGraw- H ill Companies. Inc., including. but not limited to, in any network or other  electronic storage or transmission. or broad
cast for distance learning.  Some ancillaries. including electronic and prim components. may not be available to customers out,  side the United States.  This book is printed on acid'free paper.  1234567890DOaDOC09876543  IS BN 0--07-246523--9  Publisher: Elizabeth A. Jones  Senior sponsoring editor: Carlise Paulson  M anaging developmental editor: EmilyJ. Lupash  M arketing manager: Val''"" R. B ercier  Senior project manager: Sheila M. Frank  Senior production supervisor: Laura Fu ller  Senior
 media project manager: Tamm y Juran  Senior designer: Da\·id W. Hash  Lead photo research coordinator: Carrie K. Burger  Compositor: GAC - Indianapolis  Typeface: /0//2 Times Rotnlln  Printer: R. R. Donnelley Crawfordsville. IN  Libmry of Con ~ress Gltalo~in~-in-l'ublic:ltion Data  Chapman. Stephen J.  Electric machinery fundamentals / Stephen Chapman. - 4th ed.  p. em.  Includes index.  ISBN 0-07-246523--9  I. E lectric machinery. I. T itle.  T K2000.C46 2005  621.31 ·042---dc22  www.mhhe.oom 
 2003065174  C IP  THIS WORK IS DEDICATED WITH LOVE T O  MY MOTHER , LOUI SE G. C HAPMAN ,  ON THE OCCASION  OF HER EIGHTY-RFfH BIRTHD AY.   ABOUT T H E AUT H O R  Steph en J. C hap m an received a B.S. in Electrical En gineering from Lo uisiana  State University (1975) and an M.S.E. in Electrical En gineering from the Univer­ sity of Central Florida (1979), and pursued further graduate studies at Rice  University.  From 1975 to 1980, he served as an officer in the U.S. Navy , assigned to  teach
 electrical engineering at the U.S. Naval Nuclear Powe r School in Orlando,  Florida. From 1980 to 1982, he was affiliated with the University of H ouston,  where he ran the power system s program in the College of Technology.  From 1982 to 1988 and from 1991 to 1995, he served as a m ember of the  technical stafT of tile Ma ssachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory,  both at the main facility in Lex ington, Ma ssachusetts, and at the field site on Kwa­ jalein Atoll in the Republi
c of the Marshall Islands. While there, he did research  in radar signal processing system s. H e ultimately became the leader of four large  operational range instrumentation radars at the Kwajalein field site (TRADEX,  ALTAIR, ALCOR, and MMW ).  From 1988 to 1991, Mr. Chapman was a research engineer in Shell Devel­ op m ent Company in H ouston, Texas, where he did seismic signal processing re­ search. H e was also affiliated with the University of H ouston, where he continued  to teach on a pa
rt-time basis.  Mr. Chapman is currently mana ger of system s modeling and operational  analysis for BAE SYSTEMS Australia, in M elbourne.  Mr. Chapman is a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and Elec­ tronic En gineers (and several of its comp onent societies). H e is also a m ember of  the Association for Computing Ma chinery and the Institution of En gineers  (A ustralia).  vu   BRIEF CONTENTS  Chapter 1 Introduction to Machinery Principles  Chapter 2 Tran sformers 65  Chapter 3 Int
roduction to Power Electronics 152  Chapter 4 AC Machinery Fundamentals 230  Chapter 5 Synchronolls Generators 267  Chapter 6 Synchronolls Motors 346  Chapter 7 Induction Motors 380  Chapter 8 DC Machinery Fundamentals 473  Chapter 9 DC Motor s and Generator s 533  Chapter 10 Single-Phase and Special-Purpose Motors 633  Appendix A Three-Phase Circuits 68 1  Appendix B Coil Pitch and Distributed Windings 707  Appendix C Salient-Pole Theory ofSynchronoll s Machine s 727  Appendix D Tables of Con s
tants and Conversion Factors 737  "   TA BLE O F C ONT E NTS  C hapter 1 Introduction to Machin ery Principles  1.1 Electrical M achines, Transform ers, and Daily Life  1.2 A N ote on Units and Notation  Notation  2  1.3 R otational M otion, N ew ton's Law, and Pow er R elationships 3  A ngular P osition (J I An gular Velocity w / A ngular  A cceleration a / Torque T / Newto n 's Law o/R otation I  Work W Power P  I.. Th e M agnetic Field 8  P roduction of a M agnetic Field / M agnetic C ircuits
 /  M agnetic B ehavior 01 F erromagnetic M aterials I En ergy  Losses in a Ferromagne tic Core  1.5 Faraday's L aw -Induced Voltage from a Tim e-Chan ging  M agnetic Field 28  1.6 Production of Induced Force on a Wire 32  1.7 Induced Voltage on a C onductor M oving in a M agnetic Field 34  I." Th e Linear OC M achine- A Simple Example 36  Starting the Linear DC M achine / The linear D C  M achine as a M otor I The Linear DC M achine as a  Ge nerator I Starting P roblems with the Linear Ma chine
  I.. R eal, R eactive, and Appar ent Pow er in A C C ircuits 47  A lternative Fonns of the Powe r Equations I Com plex  P owe r I The Relationships beflt'een Impeda nce An gle,  C urrent Angle, and P owe r I The Powe r Triangle  1.10 Summary 53  Q uestions 54  Problem s 55  R eferences 64  "  X II TA BLE O F CO NTENT S  C hapter 2 Transform ers 65  2.1 Wh y Transfonn ers A re Im portant to Mod ern Life 66  2.2 T ypes and Co nstruction of Transform ers 66  2.3 Th e Ideal Transfonner 68  P owe r 
in an Ideal Transforme r I Impedance  TransfornUltion through a Transfornler I A nalysis of  Circuits Containing Ideal Transformers  2.4 Th eory of Ope ration of Real Single-Phase Transform ers 76  The Voltage Ratio across a Transformer I The  M agnetization Cu rrent in a R eal Transformer I The  Cu rrent Ratio on a Transforme r and the D ot Conrention  2.5 Th e Equivalent C ircuit of a Transform er 86  The Exact Equivalent C ircuit of a Real Transformer I  A pproxinUlte Equivalent Circuits of a
 Transformer I  D etermining the Values of Components in the Transfonner  M odel  2.6 Th e Per-Unit System of Measurem ents 94  2.7 Transfonn er Voltage R egulation and Efficiency 100  The Transformer Phasor D iagram I Transfonner Efficiency  2.8 Transfonn er Taps and Voltage R egulation 108  2.9 Th e Autotransfonner 109  Voltage and C urrent Relationships in an Au totransformer I  The A pparent Powe r Rating A dvantage of Au totransfornlers I  The Internal Impedance of an Au totransformer  2.10
 Three-Phase Transfonners 11 6  Three-Phase Transform er Connections I The Per-Unit  System for Three-P hase Transformers  2.11 Three-Phase Transfonn atio n U sing T wo Transform ers 126  The Open-il (or V-V ) Connection I The Open-"3'e-O pen- D elta Connection I The Scott-T Connection I The Three- Phase T Connection  2.12 Transfonn er Ratings and R elated Problem s 134  The Voltage and Frequency Ratings of a Transformer I  The A pparent Powe r Rating of a Transfornler I The  Problem of Cu rrent
 Inrnsh I The Transformer Nameplate  2.13 Instnunent Transform ers 140  2.14 S wnm ary 142  Q uestions 143  Problem s 144  R eferences 15 1  C hapter 3  3.1  3.2  3.3  3.4  3.5  3.6  3.7  3.'  3.'  C hapter 4  4.1  T A BLE O F CO NTENT S XlU  Introduction to Power Electronics  Power Electronic Components  The Diode / The Two-Wire Thyristor or PNPN Diode / The  Three-Wire Thyristor of SCR / The Gate Turnoff Thyristor /  The DlAC / The TRIA C / The Pow er Transistor / The  Insulated-Gate Bipolar T
ransistor / Power atui Speed  Comparison of Pow er Electronic Components  B asic Rectifier Circuits  The H alf-Wave R ectifier / The Full-Wave Rectifier / The  Three-Phase H alf-Wave R ectifier / Th e Three-Phase Full- Wave Rectifier / Filtering Rectifier Output  Pulse Circuits  A Relaxation O scillator Using a PNPN Diode / Pulse  Synchronization  Voltage Variation by AC Phase Con trol  AC Phase Controlfora DC Load Drivenfrom an AC  Source / AC Phase An gle Control for an AC Load / The  Effect o
f Inductive Loads on Phase Angle Control  DC -to-DC Power Control-Choppers  Forced Commutation in Chopper C ircuits / Series- Capacitor Commutation Circuits / Parallel-Capacitor  Commutation Circuits  Inverters  The Rectifier / External Commutation lnverters / Self- Commutation Inverters / A Single-Phase Current Source  Inverter / A Three-Phase Current Source lnverter /  A Three-Phase Voltage Source Inverter / Pulse-Width  Modulation lnverters  Cyc loconverters  Ba sic Concepts / Noncirculating 
Current  Cycloconverters / Circulating Current Cycloconverters  H annonic Problems  Summary  Q uestions  Problem s  R eferences  AC Machinery Fundamentals  A Simp le Loop in a Uniform M agnetic Field  The Voltage Induced in a Simple Rotating Loop / The  Torque lnduced in a Cu rrent-Cart}'ing Loop  152  152  163  17 1  177  186  193  209  218  221  223  223  229  230  230  X IV TABLEOF CO NTENT S  4.2 Th e Rotating M agnetic Field 238  Proof of the R otating M agnetic Field Concept I The  R elati
onship between E lectrical Frequency and the Speed  of Ma gnetic Field Rotation I R eversing the D irection of  Ma gnetic Field R otation  4.3 Ma gnetomotive Force and Flux Distribution on AC M achines 246  4.4 Induced Voltage in AC Ma chines 250  The Induced Voltage in a Coil on a Two-P ole Stator I The  Induced Voltage in a Th ree-P hase Set of Coils I The RMS  Voltage in a Three-P hase Stator  4.5 Induced Torque in an AC M achine 255  4 .• Wmdin g Insulation in an AC Ma chine 258  4.7 AC Mach
ine Pow er Flows and Losses 26 1  The Losses in AC Ma chines I The P owe r-Flow D iagram  4.S Voltage Regulation and Speed R egulation 262  4.9 Swnmary 264  Q uestions 265  Problem s 265  R eferences 266  C hapter 5 Synchronou s Ge nerators 267  5.1 Synchronous Generator Construction 267  5.2 Th e Speed of Rotation of a Synchronous Generator 272  5.3 Th e Internal Generated Voltage of a Synchronous Generator 273  5.4 Th e Equivalent Circuit of a Synchronous Generator 274  5.5 Th e Phasor Diagram
 of a Synchronous Generator 279  5 .• Pow er and Torque in Synchronous Generators 280  5.7 M easuring Synchronous G enerator M odel Parameters 283  The Short-Circuit Ratio  5.8 Th e Synchronous Generator Operating Alone 288  The Effect of Load Changes on Synchronous Generator  Operating A lone I Example Problems  5.9 Parallel Operation of AC Generators 299  The Conditions R equiredfor Paralleling I The General  Procedure for Pa ralleling Generators I Frequency-Powe r  and Voltage-Reactive Powe r
 Characteristics of a Synchronous  Generator I Operation of Generators in Parallel with Large  P owe r Systems I Op eration of Generators in Parallel with  Other Generators of the Same Size  5.10 Synchronous Generator Transients 319  Transient Stability of Synchronous Generators I  Short-Circuit Transients in Synchronous Generators  5.11  5.12  C hapter 6  6.1  6.2  6.3  6.4  6.5  6.6  C hapter 7  7.1  7.2  7.3  T A BLE O F CO NTENT S XV  Synchronous Generator R atings  The Voltage, Speed, and F
requency Ratings / Apparent  Power atui Power -Factor Ratings / Synchronous  Generator Capability CUf1Jes / Short-Time Operation and  Sef1Jice Factor  Summary  Ques tions  Problem s  References  Synchronou s Motors  B asic Principles of M otor Operation  The Equiralent Circuit of a Synchronous Motor / The  Synchronous Motor from a Magnetic Field Perspective  Steady-State Synchronous M otor Operation  The Synchronous Motor Torque-Speed Characteristic CUf1Je /  The Effect of Load Changes on a Sync
hronous Motor / The  Effect of Field Changes on a Synchronous Motor / The  Synchronous Motor atui Pow er, Factor Correction /  The Synchronous Capacitor or Synchronous Condenser  Starting Synchronous M otors  Motor Starting by Reduced Electrical Frequency / Motor  Starting with an utemal Prime Mo ver / Motor Starting  by Using Amortisseur Windings / The Effect of  Amortisseur Windings on Motor Stability  Synchronous Generators and Synchronous M otors  Synchronous Motor R atings  Summary  Ques ti
ons  Problem s  References  Induction Motors  Induction M otor Construction  B asic Induction M otor Concepts  The Development of Induced Torque in an ltuiuction  Motor / The Concept of Rotor Slip / The Electrical  Frequency on the Rotor  Th e Equivalent Circuit of an Induction M otor  The Transformer Model of an Induction Motor / The Rotor  Circuit Model/The Final Equiralent Circuit  326  336  337  338  345  346  346  350  364  37 1  372  373  374  374  379  380  380  384  388  XVI TABLE OF CON
TENTS  7.4 Power and Torque in Induction Motors 394  Losses and the Pml'er-Flow Diagram I Power atui Torque  in an Induction Motor I Separating the Rotor Copper  Losses and the Pmwr Converted in an lnduction Motor S  Equivalent Cirr:uit  7.5 Induction Motor Torque-Speed Characteristics 401  lnduced Torque from a Phy sical Statuipoint IThe Derivation  of the lnduction Motor ltuiuced-Torque Equation I  Comments on the Induction Motor Torque-Speed Cun'e I  Maximum (Pullout) Torque in an ltuiuction 
Motor  7 .• Variations in Induction Motor Torque-Speed Characteristics 416  Control of Motor Characteristics by Cage Rotor Design I  Deep-Bar and Double-Cage Rotor Designs I lnduction  Motor Design Classes  7.7 Trends in Induction Motor De sign 426  7.8 Starting Induction Motors 430  lnduction Motor Starting Circuits  7.9 Speed Control of Induction Motors 434  lnduction Motor Speed Control by Pole Changing I Speed  Control by Changing the Line Frequency I Speed Control  by Changing the Line Volt
age I Speed Control by  Changing the Rotor Resistance  7.10 Solid-State Induction Motor Drives 444  Frequency (Speed) Adjustment I A Choice of Voltage and  Frequency Patterns I Independently Adjustable  A cceleration atui De celeration Ramp s I Motor Protection  7.11 Detennining Circuit M odel Parameters 452  The No-Load Test I The DC Test for Stator Resistance I  The Locked-Rotor Test  7.12 The Induction Generator 460  The lnduction Generator Operating Alone I lnduction  Generator Applications 
 7.13 Induction Motor Ratings 464  7.14 Swnmary 466  Q uestions 467  Problem s 468  R ererences 472  C hapter 8 D C Ma chinery Fund am entals 473  8.1 A Simple Rotating Loop between Curved Pole Faces 473  TA BLE O F CO NTENT S XVU  The lliltage lnduced in a Rotating Loop / Getting D C  Voltage out of the Rotating Loop / The Induced Torque in  the Rotating Loop  8.2 Co mmut ation in a Simple Four-Loop IX M achine 485  8.3 Co mmut ation and Armature Co nstruction in Real  D C M achines 490  The R 
otor Coils / Connections to the Commutato r  Segments / The Lap Winding / The W ave W inding / The  Frog-Leg Win ding  8.4 Problem s w ith Co nunutation in R eal M achines 502  Armature R eaction / L dildt Voltages / Solutions to the  P roblems with Commutation  8.5 Th e Internal Ge nerated Vo ltage and Induced Torque  Equ ations of Real DC M achines 514  8.6 Th e Co nstruction of DC M achines 518  P ole and Frame Construction / R otor or Armature  Constrnction / Commutato r and Brushes / W indi
ng  Insulation  8.7 Powe r Flow and Losses in DC M achines 524  The Losses in D C M achines / The P owe r-Flow D iagram  8.8 Summary 527  Qu estions 527  Problems 527  References 530  C hapter 9 DC Motors and Generators 533  9.1 Introduction to D C M otors 533  9.2 Th e Equivalent C ircuit of a IX M otor 535  9.3 Th e M agnetization C urve of a DC M achine 536  9.4 Separately Ex cited and Shunt IX M otors 538  The Tenninal Characteristic of a Shunt D C M otor /  Nonlinear Analysis of a Shunt D C
 M otor / Speed Control  of Shunt D C M otors / The Effect of an O pen F ield Circuit  9.5 Th e Pennanent-M agnet DC M otor 559  9.6 Th e Series IX M otor 562  Induced Torque in a Series D C M otor / The Terminal  Characteristic of a Series D C M otor / Speed Control of  Series D C M otors  9.7 Th e Co m pounded DC M otor 568  The Torque-Speed Characteristic of a Cum ulatively  Compo unded D C M otor / The Torque-Speed  XVI II T A BLE O F CO NTENT S  Cha racteristic of a D ifferentially Compoutu
ied D C M otor /  The Nonlinear Analysis of Compo unded D C M otors /  Speed Control in the Cumulatively Compoutuied D C M otor  9.8 D C M otor Starters  9.9  9.10  9.11  9.12  9.13  9.14  9.15  9.16  9.17  C hapter 10  10.1  D C M otor P roblems on Starting / D C M otor Starting  Circuits  Th e War d-Leonard System and Solid-State Speed Co ntrollers  Protection Circuit Section / StartlStop Circuit Section /  H igh.P owe r Electronics Section / Low-Powe r Electronics  Section  D C M otor Efficie
ncy Calculations  Introduction to IX Ge nerators  Th e Separately Ex cited Ge nerator  The Terminal Characteristic of a Separately Excited D C  Generator / Control of Terminal Voltage / Nonlinear  A nalysis of a Separately Excited D C Generator  Th e Shunt D C Ge nerator  Voltage B uildup in a Shunt Generator / The Tenninal  Characteristic of a Shunt D C Generator / Voltage Control  for a Shunt D C Generator / The A nalysis of Shunt D C  Generators  Th e Series DC Ge nerator  The Terminal Cha ra
cteristic of a Series Generator  Th e Crunulatively Co m po unded DC Ge nerator  The Terminal Characteristic of a Cum ulatively  Compo unded D C Generator / Voltage Control of  Cumulatively Compo unded D C Generators / A nalysis of  Cumulatively Compo unded D C Generators  Th e Differentially Co mp olUlded D C Ge nerator  The Terminal Cha racteristic of a D ifferentially  Compo unded D C Generator / Voltage Control of  D ifferentially Compo unded D C Generators / Graphical  A nalysis of a D iffe
rentially Compounded D C Generator  S runm ary  Q uestions  Problem s  R eferences  Single-Phase and S pecial-Purpose Mo tors  Th e Universal Motor  A pplications of Universal M otors / Speed Control of  Universal M otors  573  582  592  594  596  602  608  611  6 15  6 19  620  621  631  633  634  TA B LE O F CO NTENT S X IX  10.2 Introduction to Single-Phase Induction M otors 637  The D ouble.R erolving-F ield Theory of Single.Phase  Induction M otors / The Cross· Field Theory of Single.  P ha
se Induction M otors  10.3 Starting Single-Phase Induction M otors 646  Split-P hase Windings / Capacitor.Start M otors /  P ennanent Split-Capacitor and Capacitor.Start,  Capac itor.Run M otors / Shaded-Pole M otors /  Comparison of Single.P hase Induction M otors  10.4 Speed Control of Single-Phase Induction Mo tors 656  10.5 Th e Circuit Mod el of a Single-Phase Induction M otor 658  Circuit A nalysis with the Single-P hase Induction M otor  E quiralent Circuit  10.6 Other Types of Mo tors 66
5  R eluctance M otors / H ysteresis M otors /  Stepper M otors / Brushless D C M otors  10.7 Summary 677  Q uestions 678  Problem s 679  R eferences 680  Appendix A Three-Phase C ircuits 68 1  A .I Ge neration of Three-Phase Voltages and Currents 68 1  A.2 Voltages and Currents in a Three-Phase C ircuit 685  Voltages and Currents in the ~~'e (Y) Connection /  Voltages and Currents in the Delta (8) Connection  A.3 Powe r R elationships in lbree-Phase Circuits 690  Three-Phase Po .... er Equation
s Involving P hase Quantities /  Three-Phase Po .... er Equations Involving Line Quantities  A .4 Analysis of B alanced Three-Phase Systems 693  A .5 One- Line Diagram s 700  A .6 U sing the Powe r Triangle 700  Q nestions 703  Problem s 704  R eferences 706  Appendix B C oil Pitch and Distributed Windin gs 707  8.1 Th e Effect of Co il Pitch on AC Ma chines 707  The Pitch of a Coil / The Induced Voltage of a Fractional·  P itch Coil / H armonic Problems and Fractional-Pitch  Windings  XX TA BLE
 OF CO NTENT S  8.2 Distributed Windings in AC M achines 7 16  The B readth or Distribution Factor I The Generated  Voltage Including D istribution Effects / Tooth or Slot  Har monics  8.3 Swnmary 724  Q uestions 725  Problem s 725  R eferences 726  A pp endix C Salient-Pole T heory of  Synchronous Mac hines 727  C.I Development of the Equivalent Circuit of  a Salient-Pole Synchronous Ge nerator 728  C .2 Torque and Power Equations of Salient-Pole M achine 734  Problem s 735  A pp endix D Ta ble
s of Co nstants and Co nversion Fac tors 737  PREFACE  I n the years since the first edition of Electric Machinery Fundamentals was  published, there has been rapid advance in the development of larger and more  sophisticated solid-state m otor drive packages. Th e first edition of this book stated  that de m otors w ere the m ethod of choice for demanding variable-speed applica­ tions. 11131 statement is no longer true today. Now, the system of choice for speed  control applications is mo st of
ten an ac induction motor with a solid-state motor  drive. DC motors have been largely relegated to special-purpose applications  where a de power source is readily available, such as in automotive electrical  system s.  The third edition orthe book wa s extensively restructured to reflect these  changes. 1lle material on ac m otors and generators is now covered in Chapters 4  through 7, before the material on dc machines. In addition, the dc ma chinery cov­ erage was reduced compared to earlier
 editions. 1lle fourth edition continues with  this same basic structure.  Chapter I provides an introduction to basic ma chinery concepts, and con­ cludes by applying those concepts to a linear dc ma chine, which is the simplest  possible example of a ma chine. Glapter 2 covers transformers, and Chapter 3 is  an introduction to solid-state power electronic circuits. Th e material in Chapter 3  is optional, but it supports ac and dc m otor control discussions in Chapters 7, 9,  and 10.  After Ch
apter 3, an instructor may choose to teach either dc or ac ma chin­ ery first. Chapters 4 through 9 cover ac ma chinery, and Chapters 8 and 9 cover dc  ma chinery. 1llese chapter sequences have been mad e completely independent of  each other, so that instructors can cover the material in the order that best suits  their needs. For example, a one-seme ster course with a primary concentration in  ac ma chinery might consist of parts of C hapters I to 7, with any remaining time  devoted to dc ma c
hinery. A one-sem ester course with a primary concentration in  dc ma chinery might consist of parts of Chapters I, 3, 8, and 9, with any remain­ ing time devoted to ac ma chinery. Chapter \0 is devoted to single-phase and  special-purpose m otors, such as universal motors, stepper m otors, brushless dc  m otors, and shaded-pole m otors.  XXI  XXII PREFACE  TIle homew ork problems and the ends of chapters have been revised and  corrected, and m ore than 70 percent of the problems are either new 
or modified  since the last edition.  In recent years, there have been major changes in the m ethods used to teach  ma chinery to electrical engineering and electrical technology students. Ex cellent  analytical tools such as MATLAB have become widely available in university en­ gineering curricula. TIlese tools make very complex calculations simple to per­ form, and allow students to explore the behavior of problems interactively. This  edition of Electric Machinery Fundamentals mak es sclected
 use of MATLAB to  enhance a student's learning experience where appropriate. For example, students  use MATLAB in Chapter 7 to calculate the torque-speed characteristics of induc­ tion motors and to explore the properties of double-cage induction motors.  TIlis text does not teach MATLAB; it assumes that the student is familiar  with it through previous work. Also, the book does not depend on a student hav­ ing MATLAB. MATLAB provides an enhancement to the learning experience if  it is availabl
e, but if it is not, the examp les involving MATLAB can simply be  skipped, and the remainder of the text still mak es sensc.  Supplemental materials supporting the book are available from the book's  website, at www.mhhe.com/engcslelectricallchapman. The materials available at  that address include MATLAB source code, pointers to sites of interest to ma­ chinery students, a list of errata in the text, some supplemental topics that are not  covered in the main text, and supplemental MATLAB tools
.  TIlis book would never have been possible without the help of dozens of  people over the past 18 years. I am not able to acknowledge them all here, but I  would especially like to thank Charles P. LeMone, Teruo Nakawa ga, and Tadeo  M ose of Toshiba International Corporation for their invaluable help with the  solid-state ma chinery control material in Chapter 3. I would also like to thank  Jeffrey Ko stecki, Jim Wright, and others at Marathon Electric Company for sup­ pi ying mea sured data 
from some of the real generators that the company builds.  TIleir material has enhanced this revision.  Finally, I would like to thank m y wife R osa and our children Avi, David,  Rachel, Aaron, Sarah, Na omi, Shira, and Devorah for their forbearance during the  revision process. I couldn't imagine a better incentive to write!  Stepllell J. Chapman  Metboume , Victoria, Australia  1.1 ELECTRICAL MACHINES ,  TRANSFORMERS , AND DAILY LIFE  CHAPTER  1  INTRODUCTION  TO MACHINERY  PRINCIPLES  An ele
ctrical machin e is a device that can convert either m echanical energy to  electrical energy or electrical energy to m echanical energy. When such a device is  used to convert me chanical energy to electrical energy, it is called a generator.  When it converts electrical energy to me chanical energy, it is called a motor. Since  any given electrical ma chine can convert power in either direction, any ma chine  can be used as either a generator or a m otor. A lmost all practical m otors and gen­
 erators convert energy from one form to another through the action of a ma gnetic  field, and only ma chines using ma gnetic fields to perform such conversions are  considered in this book.  Th e transformer is an electrical device that is closely related to electrical  ma chines. It converts ac electrical energy at one voltage level to ac electrical en­ ergy at another voltage level. Since transfonners operate on the same principles as  generators and m otors, depending on the action ofa ma gn
etic field to accomplish  the change in voltage level, they are usually studied together with generators and  m otors.  Th ese three types of electric devices are ubiquitous in mod ern daily life.  Electric m otors in the home run refrigerators, freezers, vacuum cleaners, blenders,  air conditioners, fans, and many similar appliances. In the workp lace, m otors pro­ vide the m otive power for almost all tools. Of course, generators are necessary to  supply the power used by alJ these motors.  I 
 2 ELECTRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  Wh y are electric motors and generators so common ? The answer is very  simple: Electric power is a clean and efficient energy source that is easy to trans­ mit over long distances, and easy to control. An electric motor does not require  constant ventilation and fuel the way that an internal-combu stion engine does, so  the m otor is very well suited for use in environments where the pollutants associ­ ated with combu stion are not desirable. Instead, heat or
 me chanical energy can be  converted to electrical fonn at a distant location, the energy can be transmitted  over long distances to the place where it is to be used, and it can be used cleanly  in any horne, office, or factory. Transfonners aid this process by reducing the en­ ergy loss between the point of electric power generation and the point of its use.  1.2 A N OTE O N UNITS A ND N OTAT IO N  TIle design and study of electric ma chines and power system s are among the old­ est areas of e
lectrical engineering. Study began in the latter part of the nineteenth  century. At that time, electrical units were being standardized internationally, and  these units cam e to be universally used by engineers. Volts, amperes, ohms, watts,  and similar units, which are part of the m etric system of units, have long been  used to describe electrical quantities in ma chines.  In En glish-speaking countries, though, m echanical quantities had long been  m easured with the English system of units
 (inches, feet, pounds, etc.). This prac­ tice was followed in the study of ma chines. TIlerefore, for many years the electri­ cal and me chanical quantities of ma chines have been mea sured with different sys­ tem s of units.  In 1954, a comprehensive system of units based on the metric system was  adopted as an international standard. This system of units became known as the  Systeme International (S I) and has been adopted throughout m ost of the world.  The United States is practically the s
ole holdout--even Britain and Canada have  sw itched over to Sl.  TIle SI units will inevitably become standard in the United States as time  goes by, and professional societies such as the Institute of Electrical and Elec­ tronics En gineers (IEEE) have standardized on m etric units for all work. H ow­ ever, man y people have grow n up using English units, and this system will remain  in daily use for a long time. Engineering students and working engineers in the  United States today mu st be f
amiliar with both sets of units, since they will en­ counter both throughout their professional lives. Therefore, this book includes  problems and examples using both SI and En glish units. TIle empha sis in the ex­ amples is on SI units, but the older system is not entirely neglected.  N otation  In this book, vectors, electrical phasors, and other complex values are show n in  bold face (e.g., F), while scalars are shown in italic face (e.g., R ). In addition, a  special font is used to repres
ent ma gnetic quantities such as ma gnetomotive force  (e.g., 'iJ).  INTRODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 3  1.3 ROTATIONAL MOTION, NEWTON 'S  LAW, AND POWER RELATIONSHIPS  Alm ost all electric ma chines rotate about an axis, called the shaft of the ma chine.  Because of the rotational nature of ma chinery, it is important to have a basic un­ derstanding of rotational m otion. This section contains a brief review of the con­ cepts of distance, velocity, acceleration, N ew ton's law, and power as
 they apply to  rotating ma chinery. For a m ore detailed discussion of the concepts of rotational  dynamics, see References 2, 4, and 5.  In general, a three-dimensional vector is required to completely describe the  rotation of an object in space. H oweve r, ma chines nonnally turn on a fixed shaft,  so their rotation is restricted to one angu lar dimension. R elative to a given end of  the ma chine's shaft, the direction of rotation can be described as either clockwise  (CW ) or counterclockw
ise (CCW). For the purpose of this volume, a counter­ clockwise angle of rotation is assumed to be positive, and a clockwise one is as­ sumed to be negative. For rotation about a fixed shaft, all the concepts in this sec­ tion reduce to scalars.  Each major concept of rotational motion is defined below and is related to  the corresponding idea from linear motion.  Angular Position 0  Th e angular position () of an object is the angle at which it is oriented, m easured  from som e arbitrary refer
ence point. An gular position is usually m easured in  radians or degrees. It corresponds to the linear concept of distance along a line.  Angular Velocity w  An gular velocity (or speed) is the rate of change in angular position with respect  to time. It is assumed positive if the rotation is in a counterclockwise direction.  An gular velocity is the rotational analog of the concept of velocity on a line. One­ dimensional linear velocity along a line is defmed as the rate of change of the dis­ 
placement along the line (r) with respect to time  d,  v~ - dt (I-I)  Similarly, angular velocity w is defined as the rate of change of the angular dis­ placement () with respect to time.  w = de  dt (1-2)  If the units of angular position are radians, then angular velocity is mea sured in ra­ dians per second.  In dealing with ordinary electric ma chines, engineers often use units other  than radians per second to describe shaft speed. Frequently, the speed is given in  4 ELECTRIC MACHINERY FUN
DAMENTALS  revolutions per second or revolutions per minute. Because speed is such an im­ portant quantity in the study of ma chines, it is customary to use different symbol s  for speed when it is expressed in different units. By using these different symbols,  any possible confusion as to the units intended is minimized. TIle following sym­ bols are used in this book to describe angular velocity:  Wm angular velocity expressed in radians per second  f.. angular velocity expressed in revolution
s per second  nm angular velocity expressed in revolutions per minute  TIle subscript m on these symb ols indicates a m echanical quantity, as opposed to  an electrical quantity. If there is no possibility of confusion between m echanical  and electrical quantities, the subscript is often left out.  TIlese m easures of shaft speed are related to each other by the follow ing  equations:  (l-3a)  (1-3b)  A ngular Acceleration a  Angular acceleration is the rate of change in angular velocity with r
espect to time.  It is assumed positive if the angular velocity is increasing in an algebraic sense.  Angular acceleration is the rotational analog of the concept of acceleration on a  line. Just as one-dimensional linear acceleration is defined by the equation  angular acceleration is defined by  d,  a~ - dt  a = dw  dt  (1-4)  (1-5)  I f the units of angular velocity are radians per second, then angular acceleration is  m easured in radians per second squared.  Torque "T  In linear motion, afo
rce applied to an object causes its velocity to change. In the  absence of a net force on the object, its velocity is constant. TIle greater the force  applied to the object, the m ore rapidly its velocity changes.  TIlere exists a similar concept for rotation. When an object is rotating, its  angular velocity is constant unless a torque is present on it. Th e greater the torque  on the object, the m ore rapidly the angular velocity of the object changes.  What is torque? It can loosely be calle
d the "twisting force" on an object.  Intuitively, torque is fairly easy to understand. Ima gine a cylinder that is free to  FIGURE I-I  ,  ,  ,  ,  •  (a)  r=O  Torque is zero  INTR ODUCT ION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 5  •  F  ,  Torque is counterclockwise  'bJ  (a) A force applied to a cylinder so that it passes through the axis of rotation. T = O. (b) A force  applied to a cylinder so that its line of action misses the axis of rotation. H ere T is counterclockwise.  rotate aboul its axis. If a 
force is applied to Ihe cylinder in such a way thai its line  of action passes through the axis (Figure I-Ia), then the cylinder will not rotate.  H oweve r, if the same force is placed so that its line of action passes 10 Ihe righl of  Ihe axis (Figure I-I b), then Ihe cylinder will lend 10 rotate in a counterclockwise  direction. Th e torque or twisting action on the cylinder depends on (I) the ma gni­ tude of the applied force and (2) the distance between the axis of rotation and the  line of
 action of the force.  Th e torque on an object is defined as the product of the force applied 10 the  object and the smallest distance between the line of action of the force and the ob­ ject's axis of rotation. If r is a vector pointing from the axis of rotation to the poinl  of applicalion of the force, and if F is the applied force, then the torque can be de­ scribed as  7" = (force applied)(perpendicular distance)  = (F) (r sin ())  = rF sin () (1-6)  where () is the angle between the vecto
r r and the vector F. Th e direction of the  lorque is clockwise if it wo uld tend 10 cause a clockwise rotation and counler­ clockwise if it wou Id tend to cause a counterclockwise rotalion (Figure 1-2).  Th e units of torque are newton-m eters in SI units and pound-feel in lhe Eng­ lish system.  6 ELECTRIC MACHINERY FUND AMENTALS  rsin(1800- 1I)=rsinll  ~,  __ _ J  , , , , , ,  I 1800 _ II  T = (perpendicular distance) (force)  T = (r sin 9)F. counterclockwise  Newton's Law of Rotation  , , , 
,  F '  FIGURE 1-1  Derivation of the equation for the torque  on an object.  N ewton's law for objects m oving along a straight line describes the relationship  between the force applied to an object and its resulting acceleration. This rela­ tionship is given by the equation  where  F = nuJ  F = net force applied to an object  m = ma ss of the object  a = resulting acceleration  (1-7)  In SI units, force is mea sured in newtons, ma ss in kilogram s, and acceleration in  meters per second squar
ed. In the En glish system. force is mea sured in pounds,  ma ss in slugs, and acceleration in feet per second squared.  A similar equation describes the relationship between the torque applied to  an object and its resulting angular acceleration. This relationship, cal led Newton S  law ofrotation, is given by the equation  7" = Ja (1-8)  where 7" is the net applied torque in new ton-meters or pound-feet and a is the re­ sulting angular acceleration in radians per second squared. 1lle tenn J se
rves the  sam e purpose as an object's ma ss in linear motion. It is called the moment of  ineT1ia of the object and is m easured in kilogram-m eters squared or slug-feet  squared. Ca lculation of the mom ent of inertia of an object is beyond the scope of  this book. For infonnation about it see R ef. 2.  INTRODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 7  Work W  For linear motion, work is defined as the application of a force through a distance.  In equation fonn,  W = f Fdr (1-9)  where it is assumed tha
t the force is coil inear with the direction of m otion. For the  special case of a constant force applied collinearly with the direction of motion,  this equation becomes just  W = Fr (1-10)  Th e units of work are joules in SI and foot-pounds in the English system.  For rotational m otion, work is the application of a torque through an angle.  H ere the equation for work is  w ~ f ,dO (I-II)  and if the torque is constant,  W = TO (1-12)  Power P  Power is the rate of doing work, or the increa
se in work per unit time. The equa­ tion for power is  p = dW  dt (1-13)  It is usually m easured in joules per second (watts), but also can be m easured in  foot-pounds per second or in horsepower.  B y this defmition, and assuming that force is constant and collinear with the  direction of motion, power is given by  p = dd~ = :r (Fr) = F (~;) = Fv (1-14)  Similarly, assuming constant torque, power in rotational m otion is given by  p = dd~ = :r (TO ) = T(~~) = TW  p = TW (1-15)  Equation (1-15
) is very imp ortant in the study of electric ma chinery, because it  can describe the me chanical power on the shaft of a motor or generator.  Equation (1-I 5) is the correct relationship runong power, torque, and speed if  power is mea sured in watts, torque in newton-meters, and speed in radians per sec­ ond. If other units are used to me asure any of the above quantities, then a constant  8 ELECTRIC MACHINERY FUND AMENTALS  mu st be intnx:luced into the equation for unit conversion factors. 
It is still comm on  in U.S. engineering practice to m easure torque in pound-feet, speed in revolutions  per minute, and power in either watts or horsepower. If the appropriate conversion  factors are included in each tenn, then Equation (I-IS) becomes  T (lb-ft) n (r/min)  P (watts) = 7.04 (1-16)  P (h ) _ T (lb-ft) n (r/min)  orsepower - 5252 (1-17)  where torque is m easured in pound-feet and speed is m easured in revolutions per  minute.  1.4 THE MAGNETIC FIELD  As previously stated, ma gne
tic fields are the fundrunental m echanism by which en­ ergy is converted from one fonn to another in motors, generators, and transfonn­ ers. Four basic principles describe how ma gnetic fields are used in these devices:  I. A current-carrying wire produces a ma gnetic field in the area around it.  2. A time-changing ma gnetic field induces a voltage in a coil of wire ifit passes  through that coil. (This is the basis of transfonner action.)  3. A current-carrying wire in the presence of a ma gn
etic field has a force in­ duced on it. (This is the basis of motor action.)  4. A m oving wire in the presence of a ma gnetic field has a voltage induced in it.  (This is the basis of generator action.)  TIlis section describes and elaborates on the production of a ma gnetic field by a  current-carrying wire, whi le later sections of this chapter explain the remaining  three principles.  Production of a Magnetic Field  TIle basic law governing the production of a ma gnetic field by a current is
  Ampere's law:  (1-18)  w here H is the ma gnetic field intensity produced by the current I""" and dl is a dif­ ferential element of length along the path of integration. In SI units, I is mea sured  in amperes and H is m easured in ampere-turns per meter. To better understand the  m eaning of this equation, it is helpful to apply it to the simple example in Figure  \-3. Figure 1-3 shows a rectangular core with a winding of N turns of wire  wrapped about one leg of the core. If the core is comp
o sed of iron or certain other  similar metals (collectively calledferromagnefic mnterials), essentially all the  ma gnetic field produced by the current will remain inside the core, so the path of  integration in Ampere's law is the m ean path length of the core (. TIle current  INTR ODUCT ION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 9  Me an path length Ie  FIGURE 1-3  A simple magnetic core.  Nturns  It~'1I--- Cross-sectional  =.A  passing within the path of integration I""" is then Ni, since the coil of wire
 cuts the  path of integration Ntimes while carrying current i. Ampere 's law thus becomes  H ( = Ni (1-19)  H ere H is the ma gnitude of the ma gnetic field intensity vector H. Th erefore, the  ma gnitude or the ma gnetic field intensity in the core due to the applied current is  H =Ni  Ie (1-20)  Th e ma gnetic field intensity H is in a sense a mea sure of the "effort" that a  current is putting into the establishm ent of a ma gnetic field. Th e strength of the  ma gnetic field nux prOOuced in
 the core also depends on the material of the core.  Th e relationship between the ma gnetic field intensity H and the resulting ma g­ netic flux density B produced within a material is given by  (1-21)  w here  H = ma gnetic field intensity  /L = ma gnetic penneabi/ity of material  B = resulting ma gnetic flux density prOOuced  TIle actual ma gnetic flux density produced in a piece of material is thus  given by a product of two tenns:  H , representing the effort exerted by the current to estab
lish a ma gnetic  field  /L, representing the relative ease of establishing a ma gnetic field in a given  material  10 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  Th e units of ma gnetic field intensity are ampere-turns per meter, the units of per­ meability are henrys per meter, and the units of the resulting flux density are  webers per square m eter, known as teslas (T ).  TIle penneability of free space is called J.Lo, and its value is  /J.o = 47T X 10-7 Him (1-22)  TIle penneability of any other mater
ial compared to the penneability of free space  is called its relative permeability:  -" /L, - J.Lo (1-23)  R elative penneability is a convenient way to compare the ma gnetizability of  materials. For example, the steels used in modern ma chines have relative penne­ abilities of 2000 to 6000 or even m ore. This m eans that, for a given amount of  current, 2000 to 6000 times m ore flux is established in a piece of steel than in a  corresponding area of air. (Th e penneability of air is essential
ly the sam e as the  penneability of free space.) Ob viously, the metals in a transformer or motor core  play an extremely imp ortant part in increasing and concentrating the ma gnetic  flux in the device.  Also, because the permeability of iron is so mu ch higher than that of air, the  great majority of the flux in an iron core like that in Figure 1-3 remains inside the  core instead of traveling through the surrounding air, which has mu ch lowe r per­ meability. Th e small leakage flux that do
es leave the iron core is very important  in detennining the flux linkages between coils and the self-inductances of coils in  transformers and m otors.  In a core such as the one show n in Figure 1-3, the ma gnitude of the flux  density is given by  (1-24)  Now the total flux in a given area is given by  (1-25a)  where dA is the differential unit of area. If the flux density vector is perpendicu­ lar to a plane of areaA, and if the fl ux density is constant throughout the area, then  this equat
ion reduces to  (I-25b)  TIlUS, the total flux in the core in Figure 1-3 due to the current i in the wind- ing is  (1-26)  where A is the cross-sectional area of the core.  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES II  - -I  "  v +  ) - R + g= Ni  - I v = -R  ", ,b,  FIGU R E 1-4  (3) A simple electric cin:uit. (b) Th e magnetic circuit analog to a transformer COTe.  Ma gnetic C ircuits  In Equation (1-26) we see that the current in a coil of wire wrapped around a core  produces a ma gnetic nux i
n the core. T his is in some sense analogous to a voltage  in an electric circuit producing a current now . It is possible to define a "ma gnetic  circuit" whose behavior is governed by equations analogous to those for an elec­ tric circuit. T he ma gnetic circuit model of ma gnetic behavior is often used in the  design of electric ma chines and transfonners to simplify the otherwise quite com­ plex design process.  In a simple electric circuit such as the one show n in Figure 1-4a, the volt­ ag
e source V drives a current J around the circuit through a resistance R. T he rela­ tionship between these quantities is given by Ohm's law:  V = JR  In the electric circuit, it is the voltage or electromotive force that drives the cur­ rent n ow . By analogy, the corresponding quantity in the ma gnetic circuit is called  the magne tomotive force (mmI). T he rnagnetomotive force of the ma gnetic circuit  is equal to the effective current n ow applied to the core, or  g=N i (1-27)  where gis the 
symbo l for ma gnetomotive force, m easured in ampere-turns.  L ike the voltage source in the electric circuit, the ma gnetomotive force in  the ma gnetic circuit has a polarity associated with it. T he positive end of the mmf  source is the end from which the nux exits, and the negative end of the mmf  source is the end at which the nux reenters. T he polarity of the mmf from a coil of  wire can be detennined from a modification of the right-hand rule: If the fillgers  of the right hand curl in
 the direction of the current n ow in a coil of wire, then the  thumb will point in the direction of the positive rnrnf (see Figure 1-5).  In an electric circuit, the applied voltage causes a current J to flow. Simi­ larly, in a ma gnetic circuit, the applied ma gnetomotive force causes nux <p to be  produced. T he relationship between vo ltage and current in an electric circuit is  12 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  / /  ; rr='- N  II  ""GU R E l-S  Determining the polarity of a magnetomoti
ve force source in a magnetic cirwit.  Ohm's law (V = IR); similarly, the relationship between mag netomotive force and  flux is  where  g = ma gnetomotive force of circuit  <p = flux of circuit  CR = reluctance of circuit  (1-28)  1lle reluctance of a ma gnetic circuit is the counterpart of electrical resistance, and  its units are ampere-turns per weber.  1llere is also a ma gnetic analog of conductance. Just as the conductance of  an electric circuit is the reciprocal of its resistance, the p
ermeance cP of a ma gnetic  circuit is the reciprocal of its rei uctance:  (1-29)  Th e relationship belween rnagnetomotive force and flux can lhus be expressed as  (1-30)  Und er som e circum stances, it is easier to work with the penneance of a ma gnetic  circuit than with its reluctance.  INTR ODUcnONTO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 13  What is the reluctance of the core in Figure 1-3? Th e resulting flux in this  core is given by Equation (1-26):  (1-26)  (1-31)  B y comparing Equation (1-31) with Eq
uation (1-28), we see that the reluctance  of the core is  (1-32)  Reluctances in a ma gnetic circuit obey the sam e rules as resistances in an electric  circuit. TIle equivalent reluctance of a numb er of reluctances in series is just the  sum of the individual reluctances:  (1-33)  Similarly, reluctances in parallel combin e according to the equation  (1-34)  Penneances in series and parallel obey the same rules as electrical conductances.  Calculations of the flux in a core performed by using
 the ma gnetic circuit  concepts are always approximations-at best, they are accurate to within about  5 percent of the real answer. lllere are a numb er of reasons for this inherent  inaccuracy:  I. TIle ma gnetic circuit concept assumes that all flux is confilled within a ma g­ netic core. Unfortunately, this is not quite true. Th e permeability of a ferro­ ma gnetic core is 2(x)() to 6()(x) times that of air, but a small fraction of the flux  escapes from the core into the surrounding low-per
m eability air. This flux  outside the core is called leakage flux, and it plays a very important role in  electric ma chine design.  2. TIle calculation of reluctance assumes a certain mean path length and cross­ sectional area for the core. Th ese assumptions are not really very good, espe­ cially at corners.  3. In ferromagnetic materials, the permeability varies with the amount of flux  already in the material. This nonJineareffect is described in detail. It adds yet  another source of error
 to ma gnetic circuit analysis, since the reluctances used  in ma gnetic circuit calculations depend on the penneability of the material.  14 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  N  s  ""GURE 1-6  The fringing effect of a magnetic field at an air gap. Note  the increased cross-sectional area of the air gap compared  with the cross-sectional area of the metal.  4. If there are air gaps in the flux path in a core, the effective cross-sectional  area of the air gap will be larger than the cross-section
al area of the iron core  on either side. The extra effective area is caused by the "fringing effect" of  the ma gnetic field at the air gap (Figure 1-6).  It is possible to partially offset these inherent sources of error by using a "cor­ rected" or "effective" m ean path length and the cross-sectional area instead of the  actual physical length and area in the calculations.  TIlere are man y inherent limitations to the concept of a ma gnetic circuit, but  it is still the easiest design tool av
ailable for calculating fluxes in practical ma­ chinery design. Exact calculations using Maxw ell's equations are just too diffi­ cult, and they are not needed anyway, since satisfactory results may be achieved  with this approximate m ethod.  TIle follow ing examples illustrate basic ma gnetic circuit calculations. Note  that in these examples the answers are given to three significant digits.  Example I-t. A ferromagnetic core is shown in Figure 1-7a. Three sides of this  core are of unifonn w
idth. while the fourth side is somewhat thinner. The depth of the core  (into the page) is 10 cm. and the other dimensions are shown in the figure. There is a 2()()'"  turn coil wrapped around the left side of the core. Assruning relative penneability I-Lr of  2500. how much flux will be produced by a I-A input current?  Solutio"  We will solve this problem twice. once by hand and once by a MATLAB program. and  show that both approaches yield the same answer.  Three sides of the core have the sa
me cross-sectional areas. while the fourth side has  a different area. Thus. the core can be divided into two regions: (I) the single thiImer side  and (2) the other three sides taken together. The magnetic circuit corresponding to this core  is shown in Figure 1-7b.  INTR O DUcn O NT O M AC HINERY PR IN C IPL ES 15  , ,  f---15 cm -_!-____ 30 em -----.,_10 cm _ , ,  , ,  , ,  -----t---------t-------;------t---T- 15 cm  --------------i------i----- -------;  ---- N", 200 turns 30 em  ---- ---- --
-----------+-------~-- -- ------- '-----i----I, -----i----'  _____ +-----+ ___ -+----+ ____ L  15 cm  , ,  , ,  , ,  f---15 cm -_i-____ 30 = ------i- 1O cm _ , , ,  (.j De pth = IOcm  ;- + 'iJ( '" NO  (b j  F IGU R E 1-7  (a) Th e ferromagnetic core of Ex amp le I- I. (b) Th e magnetic circuit corresponding to (a).  16 ELECIR IC M AC HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS  Th e m ean path length of region I is 45 cm , and the cross-sectional area is 10 X 10  cm = 100 cm 2. Th erefore, the reluctance in the fir
st region is  cc~~-,O~.4~5~m~~c-cc = (25DOX4 7T X 10 7)(0.0 1 m 2)  = 14,300 A ° turns/Wb  (1-32)  Th e m ean path length of region 2 is 130 cm , and the cross-sectional area is 15 X 10  cm = 150 cm 2. Th erefore, the reluctance in the second region is  l2 l2  "" = _ = c:-'-, J.Ul.2 14 ~2  ccccccc-_lc· 3~m~cccc-c~ = (25DOX4 7T X 10 7)(0.0 15 m 2)  = 27,600 A ° turns/Wb  Th erefore, the total reluctance in the core is  ~ = 'l:!l + 'l:!2  = 14,3DO A ° tum slWb + 27,600 A ° tlUlls/Wb  = 4 1,900 A °
 tum slWb  Th e total magnetom otive force is  g = Ni = (2DO turnsX I.O A ) = 200 A ° turns  Th e total flux in the core is given by  g 200 A ° tlUllS  cp = CR = 4 1,900 A otlUllslW b  = 0.0048 \Vb  (1-32)  This calculation can be perfonned by using a M ATLAB script file, if desired. A sim­ ple script to calculate the flux in the core is show n below.  !l; M -file : exl_ 1.m  !l; M -file t o calc ula t e the flu x  11 0 .45;  in Ex a m p l e 1-1 .  12 1. 3;  "'  0 .01 ;  "'  0 .01 5 ;  or 2500; 
 0 0 4* p i* lE- 7;  0 200;  i ~  "  !l; Ca lc ula t e the fir st r e lu c ta n ce  rl = 1 1 I (u r * u O * a l );  d i sp ( ['rl = ' n um 2str(rl) I );  !l; Ca lc ula t e the secon d r e lu c ta n ce  r 2 = 12 I (u r * u O * a2 );  d i sp ( ['r 2 = ' n um 2str(r 2 ) I );  % L e ng th o f r egi o n 1  • • • • •  • •  L e ng th o f r egi o n 2  A r ea o f r egi o n 1  A r ea o f r egi o n 2  R e l a t ive perm eability  P e rm eability o f f ree space  Num ber o f turn s o n cor e  CU rre n t in 
am ps  INTR O DUCTI O N T O M AC HINERY PRI N C IPL ES 17  % Ca lc u la te the t o ta l re luc ta nce  rto t = rl + r 2;  % Ca lc u la te the rum f  rum f= n * i ;  % Fina lly, get the flu x in the co re  f lu x = rumf I rto t ;  % D isplay result  d isp (['Flu x = ' num 2str(flu x ) I );  Wh en this program is executed, the results are:  ,. e1:1_ 1  rl = 14 323.944 9  r 2 = 27586 ,8568  Flu x = 0 ,00 4772  This program produces the sam e answe r as o ur hand calculations to the num ber of signi
fi­ cant digits in the problem.  Exa mpl e 1-2. Figure 1-8a shows a ferrom agnetic core whose m ean path length is  40 cm. Th ere is a sm all gap of 0.05 cm in the structure of the otherwise w hole core. Th e  cross-sectional area of the core is 12 cm 2, the relative perm eability of the core is 4(x)(), and  the coil of wire on the core has 400 turns. Assmn e that fringing in the air gap increases the  effective cross-sectional area of the air gap by 5 percent. Given this infonn ation, find  (a)
 the total reluctance of the flux path (iron plus air gap) and (b) the current required to  produce a flux density of 0.5 T in the air gap.  Solutioll  Th e m agnetic circuit corresponding to this core is show n in Figure 1-8b.  (a) Th e reluctance of the core is  I, 1<  "" = - = J.Ul. < /.t r IJ.ty'I. <  (1-32)  cccccc--cOc·4~m~=ccc-cc = (4000X 47T X 10 7XO .OO2 m 2)  = 66,300 A • turns/W b  Th e effective area of the air gap is 1.05 X 12 cm 2 = 12.6 cm 2, so the reluctance of the air  gap is  
I.  "'" = ­wi,  0.0005 m  = C(4C~--CX~1~Oa'X~O~. OO~1~276~m"')  = 3 16,OOO A · turns/Wb  (1-32)  18 ELECIRI C M AC HINERY FUND A MENT ALS  N=400  turns  g(=Ni)  fo'IG UR E 1-8  +  ,b,  "  J 1-0.05 em  T  A=12cm 2  CJ;>.. (R eluctance of core)  CJ:.>., (R eluctance of air gap)  (a) The ferromagnetic core of Ex ample 1-2. (b) The magnetic circuit corresponding to (a).  Th erefore, the total reluctance of the flux path is  1l! ... = CJ:l" + CQ"  = 66,300 A· turns/Wb + 3 16,OOO A· turnsIWb  = 382,30
0 A • tum slWb  N ote that the air gap contributes m ost of the reluctance even though it is 800 times shorter  than the core.  (b) Equ ation (1-28) states that  Since the flux cp = BA and 'if = Ni, this equation becom es  Ni = BA Cl!  (1-28)  INTRODUcnONTO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 19  . BAct! ,=--N  (0.5 D(0.00126 m 2)(383,200 A ° tlU1lsi Wb)  = 400 turns  = 0.602 A  Notice that, since the air-gap flux was required, the effective air-gap area was used in the  above equation.  EXllmpl e 1-3. Fig
ure 1-9a shows a simplified rotor and stator for a dc motor. The  mean path length of the stator is 50 cm, and its cross-sectional area is 12 cm 2. The mean  path length of the rotor is 5 em, and its cross-sectional area also may be assruned to be  12 cm 2. Each air gap between the rotor and the stator is 0.05 cm wide, and the cross­ sectional area of each air gap (including fringing) is 14 cm 2 . The iron of the core has a rel­ ative penneability of 2()(x), and there are 200 turns of wire on th
e core. If the current in the  wire is adjusted to be I A, what will the resulting flux density in the air gaps be?  Solutioll  To detennine the flux density in the air gap, it is necessary to first calculate the magneto­ motive force applied to the core and the total reluctance of the flux path. With this infor­ mation, the total flux in the core can be found. Finally, knowing the cross-sectional area of  the air gaps enables the flux density to be calculated.  The reluctance of the stator is  
---""c­'ll,=  /-t r IJ.QI\ I  ccccccc-~OC·50m",ccc~o-" = (2000X47T X 10 7)(0.0012 m 2)  = 166,oooA o tlUllsIWb  The reluctance of the rotor is  ---""~ 'll,=  /-tr IJ.QI\r  O.05m  = C(2;;;()()()=X:C4C-~-;X""'lo;O'i'C;;)(;;CO.;;:OO;;;1;;:2C:m:h')  = 16,600A o tumslWb  The reluctance of the air gaps is  '. "'" = ---'"c­/-t r IJ.QI\.  0.0005 m  = C(1~)(~4-~~X~10~'X~O~.OO~1~4-m")  = 284,000 A ° tlUllsIWb  The magnetic circuit corresponding to this machine is shown in Figure 1-9b. The total re­ luctan
ce of the flux path is thus  20 ELECIR IC M AC HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS  ~I~I, ="m  Ic=50cm  ,.,  Stator reluctance  ,b,  ""G UR E 1-9  (a) A simplified diagram of a rotor and stator for a de motor. (b) The magnetic circuit corresponding  to (a).  CJ:l..q = Ci:!, + CJ:!"t + Ci:!, + Ci:!~2  = 166,000 + 284,000 + 16,600 + 284,000 A • tum slWb  = 75 1,oooA · turns/Wb  Th e net magnetomo tive force applied to the core is  g = Ni = (200 turnsX I.OA ) = 200 A • turns  Th erefore, the total flux in the 
core is  INTR ODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 21  g 200 A • turns  cp = CR = 751.0CXl A • turnsJ \Vb  = 0.cXl266 Wb  Finally, the magnetic flux density in the motor's air gap is  B = cp = 0.000266 Wb  A 0.0014 m 2 0.19T  Magnetic Behavior of Ferromagnetic Materials  Earlier in this section, ma gnetic permeability was defined by the equation  (1-21)  It was explained that the penneability of ferromagnetic materials is very high, up  to 6(X)Q times the penneability of free space. In that discussi
on and in the examples  that followed, the penneability was assumed to be constant regardless of the ma g­ netom otive force applied to the material. Although permeability is constant in free  space, this m ost certainly is not true for iron and other ferromagnetic materials.  To illustrate the behavior of ma gnetic penneability in a ferromagnetic ma­ terial, apply a direct current to the core shown in Figure 1-3, starting with 0 A and  slow ly working up to the maximum permissible current. Wh e
n the flux prOOuced  in the core is plotted versus the ma gnetomotive force producing it, the resulting  plot looks like Figure I-lOa. lllis type of plot is called a saturation curoe or a  magnetization culVe. At first, a small increase in the ma gnetomotive force pro­ duces a huge increase in the resulting flux. After a certain point, though, further  increases in the ma gnetom otive force produce relatively smaller increases in the  flux. Finally, an increase in the ma gnetomotive force produc
es almost no change  at all. The region of this figure in which the curve flattens out is called the satu­ ration region, and the core is said to be saturated. In contrast, the region where the  flux changes very rapidly is calJed the unsaturated region of the curve, and the  core is said to be unsaturated. Th e transition region between the unsaturated re­ gion and the saturated region is som etimes called the knee of the curve. N ote that  the flux produced in the core is linearly related to t
he applied ma gnetomotive  force in the unsaturated region, and approaches a constant value regardless of  ma gnetomotive force in the saturated region.  Another closely related plot is show n in Figure I-lOb. Figure I-lOb is a  plot of ma gnetic flux density B versus ma gnetizing intensity H. From Equations  (1-20) and (I-25b),  Ni g  H ~ - ~ - ( Ie  '" ~ BA  (1-20)  (I- 25b)  it is easy to see that magnetizing intensity is directly proP011io1UJi to magnetomotive  force and magne tic flux densi
ty is directly propoT1ional to flux for any given core.  Therefore, the relationship between B and H has the sam e shape as the relationship  22 ELECIR IC M AC HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS  ..p.Wb B .T  2.8  2.6  2.4  2.2  2.0  E 1.8  • . ~ 1.6  ~ 1.4  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  o  \0  (a)  20 30 40 50  F . A · turns  v  /  100 200 300 500 1000  M agnetizing iotensity H. A · turnslm  "I  ""G UR E \-10  H . A · turnslm  ,b,  2000 5000  (a) Sketch of a dc magnetization curve for a ferromagnetic core. (b)
 Th e magnetization curve  expressed in terms of flux density and magnetizing intensity. (c) A detailed magnetization curve for a  typical piece of steel. (d) A plot of relative permeability /J., as a function of magnetizing intensity H  for a typical piece of steel.  7(XX)  2(xx)  ](XX)  o  10  FIGU R E \-\0  (continued)  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 23  /  ~  '\  '\  '\  20 30 40 50 ]00 200  Magnetizing intensity H (A ' turnslm)  I"  "- 300  '" i'- 500  between flux and ma gnetom o
tive force. T he slope of the curve of flux density ver­ sus ma gnetizing intensity at any value of H in Figure I-I Db is by definition the per­ meability of the core at that ma gnetizing intensity. The curve show s that the penne­ ability is large and relatively constant in the unsaturated region and then gradually  drops to a very low value as the core becomes heavily saturated.  1000  Figure I- IDe is a ma gnetization curve for a typical piece of steel shown in  more detail and with the ma gn
etizing intensity on a logarithmic scale. Only with  the ma gnetizing intensity shown logarithmically can the huge saturation region of  the curve fit onto the graph.  T he advantage of using a ferromagnetic material for cores in electric ma­ chines and transfonners is that one gets man y times more flux for a given ma gne­ tom otive force with iron than with air. H oweve r, if the resulting flux has to be pro­ portional, or nearly so, to the applied ma gnetomotive force, then the core must be  
operated in the unsaturated region of the ma gnetization curve.  Since real generators and motors depend on ma gnetic flux to produce volt­ age and torque, they are designed to produce as much flux as possible. As a result,  m ost real ma chines operate near the knee of the ma gnetization curve, and the flux  in their cores is not linearly related to the ma gnetomotive force producing it. T his  24 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  nonlinearity accounts for many of the peculiar behaviors of ma ch
ines that will be  explained in future chapters. W e will use MATLAB to calculate solutions to prob­ lem s involving the nonlinear behavior of real ma chines.  Examp le 1-4. Find the relative penneability of the typical ferromagnetic material  who se magnetization curve is shown in Figure l-lOc at (a) H = 50. (b) H = 100. (c) H =  500. and (d) H = 1000 A ° turns/m.  Solutio"  The penneability of a material is given by  and the relative permeability is given by  IJ-= B H  (1-23)  Thus. it is easy
 to detennine the penneability at any given magnetizing intensity.  (a) AtH = 50A otums/m.B = 0.25T. so  B 0.25 T  IJ-= H = 50 A ° turns/m = O.OO5Q Him  = ~ = 0.0050 HIm = 3980  IL, f.1.O 47T X 10 7 Hhn  (b) At H = lOOA ° turns/m. B = 0.72 T. so  B 0.72 T  IJ-= H = 100 A ° turns/m = 0.0072 Him  = ~ = 0.0072 HIm = 5730  IJ-, f.1.O 47T X 10 7 H hn  (c) AtH = 500 A ° turns/m.B= I.40T ,so  B 1.40 T  IJ-= H = 500 A ° turns/m = 0.0028 Him  = ~ = 0.0028 HIm = 2230  IJ-, f.1.O 47T X 10 7 Hhn  (d) AtH = 
lOOOA oturns/m,B = 1.51 T, so  B 1.51 T  IJ-= H = 1000 A ° turns/m = 0.00151 Him  = ~ = 0.00151 HIm = 1200  IJ-, f.1.O 47T X 10 7 H hn  INTR ODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 25  N otice that as the ma gnetizing intensity is increased, the relative penne­ ability first increases and then starts to drop off. Th e relative permeability of a typ­ ical ferromagnetic material as a function of the ma gnetizing intensity is show n in  Figure 1-lOd. This shape is fairly typical of all ferromagnetic mater
ials. It can  easily be seen from the curve for /L. versus H that the assumption of constant rel­ ative penneability mad e in Exampl es 1-1 to \-3 is valid only ove r a relatively  narrow range of ma gnetizing intensities (or ma gnetomoti ve forces).  In the fo llow ing example, the relative penneability is not assumed constant.  Instead, the relationship between Band H is given by a graph.  Example 1-5. A square magnetic core has a mean path length of 55 cm and a cross­ sectional area of 150 cm
 2. A 2()()...tum coil of wire is wrapped arOlUld one leg of the core. The  core is made of a material having the magnetization curve shown in Figure l-lOc.  (a) H ow much current is required to produce 0.012 Wb of flux in the core?  (b) What is the core's relative permeability at that current level?  (c) What is its reluctance?  Solutioll  (a) The required flux density in the core is  B = q, = 1.012 Wb = 0.8T  A 0.015 m 2  From Figure l-lOc, the required magnetizing intensity is  H = 115 A" tur
ns/m  From Equation (1-20), the magnetomotive force needed to produce this magnetizing in­ tensity is  q= Ni = Hlc  = (115 A" turns/mXD.55 m) = 63.25 A" turns  so the required current is  i = q = 63.25 A" turns = 0.316A  N 200 turns  (b) The core's permeability at this current is  B 0.8T  I.L = H = liS A "turnshn = 0.00696 Him  Therefore, the relative permeability is  I.L 0.00696 Him  I.Lr = 1.1.0 = 47T X 10 7 Him 5540  (c) The reluctance of the core is  tT'I = q = 63.25 A" turns = 5270 A. _ .. 
~ -'" q, 0.012Wb turn", .. u  26 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  i (t)  R esidual  flux -------= ,.,  ,,'  ¢ (or 8)  b --- --------.,f-J~"'I_--------'J(or H)  ,b,  ""GU R E I-II  The hysteresis loop traced out by the flux in a core when the current i{l) is applied to it.  E nergy L osses in a Ferrom agnetic Co re  Instead of applying a direct current to the windings on Ihe core, let us now apply  an alternating currenl and observe what happens. TIle currenl to be applied is  show n in Figure
 I- ila. Assume that the flux in the core is initially zero. As the  current increases for the first time, the flux in the core traces out path ab in Figure  I- lib. lllis is basically the saturation curve show n in Figure 1-10. H oweve r,  when Ihe current falls again, thef1ux traces out a different path from the one itfol­ lowed when the current increased. As the current decreases, the flux in the core  traces out path bcd, and later when the current increases again, the flux traces out  path 
deb. N otice that the amount of flux present in Ihe core depends nol only on  Ihe amount of current applied to the windings of the core, but also on the previous  history of the flux in Ihe core.lllis dependence on the preceding flux history and  the resulting failure to retrace flux paths is cal led hysteresis. Path bcdeb traced out  in Figure I- II b as the applied current changes is called a hysteresis loop.  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 27  - /' '-I \ - - - - - - - - I X I - X - 
I -- /' - ----- I - /' \ "- X /' - -- - - '\ - \ - "- /' - " - - ---" - / X / I • • - - -.. - /'  ---- 1 I \ I  " t / -- - -.. - " ,b,  FIGURE 1-12  (a) M agnetic domains oriented randomly. (b) M agnetic domains lined up in the presence of an  external magnetic field.  - - /'  - ----..  N otice that if a large ma gnetomolive force is first applied to the core and  then removed, the flux path in the core will be abc, When the ma gnetom otive  force is removed, the flux in the core does not go to 
zero. Instead, a ma gnetic field  is left in the core. This ma gnetic field is called the residual flux in the core. It is in  precisely this manner that pennanent mag nets are produced. To force the flux to  zero, an amount of ma gnetomotive force know n as the coercive magnetomotive  force '(tc mu st be applied to the core in the opposite direction.  Why does hysteresis occur? To understand the behavior of ferromagnetic  materials, it is necessary to know som ething about their structure. TIle
 atoms of  iron and similar m etals (cobalt, nickel, and some of their alloys) tend to have their  ma gnetic fields closely aligned with each other. Within the metal, there are man y  small regions called domnins, In each domain, all the atoms are aligned with their  ma gnetic fields pointing in the sam e direction, so each domain within the material  acts as a small permanent ma gnet. Th e reason that a who le block of iron can ap­ pear to have no flux is that these numerou s tiny domains are o
riented randomly  within the material. An examp le of the domain structure within a piece of iron is  show n in Figure 1- 12.  When an external ma gnetic field is applied to this block of iron, it causes do­ mains that happen to point in the direction of the field to grow at the expense of  domains pointed in other directions. D omains pointing in the direction of the mag­ netic field grow because the atoms at their boundaries physically sw itch orientation  to align them selves with the applied
 ma gnetic field. Th e extra atoms aligned with  the field increase the mag netic nux in the iron, which in turn causes m ore atoms to  sw itch orientation, further increasing the strength of the ma gnetic field. It is this pos­ itive feedback effect that causes iron to have a penneabiJity much higher than air.  A s the strength of the external ma gnetic field continues to increase, whole  domains that are aligned in the wrong direction eventually reorient them selves as  28 ELECIRIC MACHINERY F
UNDAMENTALS  a unit to line up with the field. Finally, when nearly all the atoms and domains in  the iron are lined up with the external field, any further increase in the ma gneto­ motive force can cause only the same flux increase that it would in free space.  (Once everything is aligned, there can be no m ore feedback effect to strengthen  the field.) At this point, the iron is saturated with flux. This is the situation in the  saturated region of the ma gnetization curve in Figure 1-10.  TI
le key to hysteresis is that when the external ma gnetic field is removed,  the domains do not completely randomize again. Why do the domains remain  lined up? Be cause turning the atoms in them requires energy. Originally, energy  was provided by the external ma gnetic field to accomplish the alignment; when  the field is removed, there is no source of energy to cause all the domains to rotate  back. Th e piece of iron is now a penn anent ma gnet.  Once the domains are aligned, som e of them wi
 ll remain aligned until a  source of external energy is supplied to change them. Exampl es of sources of ex­ ternal energy that can change the boundaries between domains and/or the align­ ment of domains are ma gnetom otive force applied in another direction, a large  m echanical shock, and heating. Any of these events can impart energy to the do­ mains and enable them to change alignment. (It is for this reason that a permanent  ma gnet can lose its ma gnetism if it is dropped, hit with a hamm
er, or heated.)  TIle fact that turning domains in the iron requires energy leads to a common  type of energy loss in all ma chines and transfonners. Th e hysteresis loss in an iron  core is the energy required to accomp lish the reorientation of domains during each  cycle of the alternating current applied to the core. It can be show n that the area  enclosed in the hysteresis loop formed by applying an alternating current to the  core is directly proportional to the energy lost in a given ac c
ycle. The smaller the  applied ma gnetom otive force excursions on the core, the smaller the area of  the resulting hysteresis loop and so the smaller the resulting losses. Figure 1-13  illustrates this point.  Another type of loss should be mentioned at this point, since it is also  caused by varying ma gnetic fields in an iron core. This loss is the eddy current  loss. Th e me chanism of eddy current losses is explained later after Faraday's law  has been introduced. Both hysteresis and eddy c
urrent losses cause heating in the  core material, and both losses mu st be considered in the design of any ma chine or  transformer. Since both losses occur within the m etal of the core, they are usually  lumped together and called core losses.  1.5 FARADAY'S LAW-INDUCED VOLTAGE  FROM A TIME-CHANGING MAGNETIC  FIELD  So far, attention has been focused on the pnxluction of a ma gnetic field and on its  properties. It is now time to examine the various ways in which an existing ma g­ netic field
 can affect its surroundings.  TIle first major effect to be considered is cal led Faraday s law. It is the ba­ sis of transfonner operation. Faraday's law states that if a flux passes through a  INTR ODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 29  ¢ (or 8 )  , ,  -'  " -----,Hf,',fr-!,f-f-------'J(or H )  ,  FIGURE \-13  , , Area c< hysteresis loss  The elTect of the size of magoetomotive force excursions on the magnitude of the hysteresis loss.  turn of a coil of wire, a voltage will be induced in the tu
rn of wire that is directly  proportional to the rate of change in the flux with respect to time. In equation  fonn,  (1-35)  where eind is the voltage induced in the turn of the coil and <P is the flux passing  through the turn. If a coil has N turns and if the sam e flux passes through all of  them, then the voltage induced across the who le coil is given by  where  eioo = voltage induced in the coil  N = number of turns of wire in coil  <p = nux passing through coil  (1-36)  Th e minus sign i
n the equations is an expression of Lenz slaw. Lenz's law states  that the direction of the voltage buildup in the coil is such that if the coil ends  were short circuited, it would produce current that would cause a flux opposing  the original nux change. Since the induced voltage opposes the change that causes  it, a minus sign is included in Equation (1-36). To understand this concept clearly,  30 ELECIRI C MA C HI NERY FUNDAMENT ALS  Direction of j required  ;  +  '00 (  N turns  I.  (.)  ""
GURE 1-14  , , •  I·  (b)  Direction of  opposing flux  ¢ increasing  The meaning of Lenz's law: (a) A coil enclosing an increasing magnetic flux: (b) determining the  resulting voltage polarity.  examine Figure 1- 14. If the nux shown in the figure is increasing in strength, then  the voltage built up in the coil will tend to establish a flux that will oppose the in­ crease. A current flowing as shown in Figure 1-14b would produce a nux oppos­ ing the iflcrease, so the voltage Ofl the coil mu s
t be built up with the polarity re­ quired to drive that current through the external circuit. 1l1erefore, the voltage  mu st be buill up with Ihe polarity shown in the figure. Since the polarity of the re­ sulting voltage can be detennined from physical considerations, Ihe minu s sign in  Equalions (1-35) and (1-36) is often left out. It is left out of Faraday's law in the  remainder of this book.  1l1ere is one major difficu lIy involved in using Equation (1-36) in practical  problem s. Th at 
equation assumes that exactly Ihe sam e flux is present in each tum  of the coil. Unfortunately, the flux leaking oUI of the core inlo the surrounding air  prevents this from being lrue. If the windings are tightly coupled, so that the vast  majority of the flux passing through one turn of the coil does indeed pass through  all of them , then Equation (1-36) will give valid answers. Bul if leakage is quite  high or if extreme accuracy is required, a different expression that does not make  that 
assumption will be needed. Th e ma gnitude of the voliage in the ith tum of the  coil is always given by  I f there are N turns in the coi I of wire, the total vollage on the coil is  N  eind = ~ ei  i- I  (1-37)  (1-38)  INTR ODUcnONTO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 31  (1-39)  (1-40)  Th e term in parentheses in Equation (1--40) is cal led the flux linkage A of the coil,  and Faraday's law can be rewritten in term s of flux linkage as  (1-41)  where (1-42)  Th e units of flux linkage are weber-turns.  F
araday's law is the fundam ental property of ma gnetic fields involved in  transformer operation. Th e effect of Len z's law in transformers is to predict the  polarity of the voltages induced in transformer windings.  Faraday's law also explains the eddy current losses m entioned previously.  A time-changing flux induces voltage within a ferromagnetic core in just the same  manner as it would in a wire wrapped around that core. TIlese voltages cause  sw irls of current to flow within the core, 
much like the eddies seen at the edges of  a river. It is the shape of these currents that gives rise to the nam e eddy currents.  Th ese eddy currents are flow ing in a resistive material (the iron of the core), so  energy is dissipated by them. The lost energy goes into heating the iron core.  Th e amount of energy lost to eddy currents is proportional to the size of the  paths they follow within the core. For this reason, it is customary to break up any  ferromagnetic core that may be subject
 to alternating fluxes into many small  strips, or laminntions, and to build the core up out of these strips. An insulating  oxide or resin is used between the strips. so that the current paths for eddy currents  are limited to very small areas. B ecause the insulating layers are extremely thin,  this action reduces eddy current losses with very little effect on the core's ma g­ netic properties. Actual eddy current losses are proportional to the square of the  lamination thickness, so there is 
a strong incentive to mak e the laminations as thin  as economically possible.  EXllmp le 1-6. Figure 1-15 shows a coil of wire wrapped around an iron core. If  the flux in the core is given by the equation  cp = 0.05 sin 377t Wb  If there are 100 turns on the core. what voltage is produced at the terminals of the coil?  Of what polarity is the voltage during the time when flux is increasing in the reference  32 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  /' /  Require d direction of i  ;  -+  N= 100 tu
rns  Opposing ~ .- H ,  t I /  ~ _ 0.05 Sin 3771 Wb  ""GU R E 1-15  The core of Ex ample 1--6. Determination of the voltage polarity at the terminals is shown.  direction shown in the figure? Asswne that all the magnetic flux stays within the core (i.e.,  assume that the flux leakage is zero).  Solutioll  By the same reasoning as in the discussion on pages 29-30, the direction of the voltage  while the flux is increasing in the reference direction mu st be positive to negative, as shown  in Figu
re 1- 15. The magnitude of the voltage is given by  or alternatively,  d~  e;"" = NYt  = (100 turns) :, (0.05 sin 377t)  = 1885 cos 377t  eiod = 1885 sin(377t + goO) V  1.6 PROD UC TION OF IND UC ED FOR C E  ONAWIRE  A second major effect of a ma gnetic field on its surroundings is that it induces a  force on a current-carrying wire within the field. T he basic concept involved is il­ lustrated in Figure 1- 16. T he figure shows a conductor present in a unifonn ma g­ netic field of flux density 
D, pointing into the page. 1lle conductor itself is I m e­ ters long and contains a current of i amperes. T he force induced on the conductor  is given by  F = i(I X D ) (1-43)  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 33  , , - , , "  J , , , ,  , , , ,  , , I , ,  , , " ,  I  , , J , ,  FlGU R E 1-16  h A current-carrying wire in the presence of 3.  , , - , , magnetic field.  where  i = ma gnitude of current in wire  I = length of wire, with direction of I defined to be in the direction of  cu
rrent flow  B = ma gnetic flux density vector  T he direction of the force is given by the right-hand rule: If the index finger of the  right hand points in the direction of the vector I and the middle finger points in the  direction of the flux density vector B , then the thumb points in the direction of  the resultant force on the wire. TIle ma gnitude of the force is given by the equation  F = UR sin () (1-44)  where () is the angle between the wire and the flux density vector.  Ex ampl e 1-7
. Figure 1- 16 shows a wire carrying a current in the presence ofa  magnetic field. The magnetic flux density is 0.25 T. directed into the page. If the wire is  1.0 m long and carries 0.5 A of current in the direction from the top of the page to the bot­ tom of the page. what are the magnitude and direction of the force induced on the wire?  Solutioll  The direction of the force is given by the right-hand rule as being to the right. The magni­ tude is given by  F = ilB sin (J (1-44)  = (0.5 AXI.
O m)(0.25 T) sin 90° = 0.125 N  Therefore.  F = 0.125 N. directed to the right  T he induction of a force in a wire by a current in the presence of a ma gnetic  field is the basis of motor action. A lm ost every type of motor depends on this  basic principle for the forces and torques which mak e it m ove.  34 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  1.7 INDUCED VOLTAGE ON A CONDUCTOR  MOVING IN A MAGNETIC FIELD  Th ere is a third major way in which a ma gnetic field interacts with its surround­ ings. I
f a wire with the proper orientation moves through a ma gnetic field, a volt­ age is induced in it. TIlis idea is shown in Figure \-\7. TIle voltage induced in the  wire is given by  eiD<! = (v X B) • I (1-45)  where  v = velocity of the wire  B = ma gnetic nux density vector  I = length of conductor in the ma gnetic field  Vector I points along the direction of the wire towa rd the end making the smallest  angle with respect to the vector v X B. The voltage in the wire will be built up so  that
 the positive end is in the direction of the vector v X B. TIle following exam­ ples illustrate this concept.  Example 1-8. Figure 1-17 shows a cond uctor moving with a velocity of 5.0 m1s  to the right in the presence of a magnetic field. The flux density is 0.5 T into the page, and  the wire is 1.0 m in length, oriented as shown. What are the magnitude and polarity of the  resulting induced voltage?  Solutio"  The direction of the quantity v X B in this example is up. Therefore, the voltage on
 the con­ ductor will be built up positive at the top with respect to the bottom of the wire. The direc­ tion of vector I is up, so that it makes the smallest angle with respect to the vector \' X B.  Since \' is perpendicular to B and since v X B is parallel to I, the magnitude of the  induced voltage reduces to  ejmd = (\' X B )·I  = (vB sin 90°) I cos 0°  = vB I  = (5.0 mls)(0.5 T XI.O m)  = 2.5 V  Thus the induced voltage is 2.5 V, positive at the top of the wire.  (1---45)  Example 1-9. Fig
ure 1-18 show s a conductor moving with a velocity of 10 m1s  to the right in a magnetic field. The flux density is 0.5 T, out of the page, and the wire is  1.0 m in length, oriented as shown. What are the magnitude and polarity of the resulting  induced voltage?  Solutioll  The direction of the quantity v X B is down. The wire is not oriented on an up-down line,  so choose the direction of I as shown to make the smallest possible angle with the direction  INTR O DUCTI O N T O M AC HINERY PR IN 
C IPL ES 35  x x +  ~ ,:X B  x •  ++  x x x x  ,~  x X I X X  ,  X X X X  Jo'IGUR E 1-17  X X - '"  X X  A conductor moving in the presence of a  magnetic field.  • • • •  II  •  •  • •  3<1'  •  I  • •  vX II  • • • Jo'IG U R E 1- 18  The conductor of Ex ample 1--9.  of \' X B . The voltage is positive at the bottom of the wire with respect to the top of the  w ire. The m agnitude of the voltage is  eiod = (\' X B )'I  = (vB sin 90°) l cos 30°  = (10.0 m1sX0.51)(I.O m ) cos 30°  = 4.33 V  (1--4
5)  T he ind uction of voltages in a wire m oving in a m agnetic field is funda­ m ental to the operation of all types of generators. For this reason, it is called gen­ erator action.  36 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  Switch Magnetic field into page  R  1  X X X  +  -=-VB e ;00  X X X  ""GU R E 1-19  A linear dc machine. Th e magnetic field points into the page.  1.8 TH E LIN EA R D C M AC HIN E - A SIMPLE  E X A MPL E  •  A linear dc machine is about the simplest and easiest-to-understand
 version of a  dc machine, yet it operates according to the sam e principles and exhibits the same  behavior as real generators and m otors. It thus serves as a good starting point in  the study of ma chines.  A linear dc ma chine is shown in Figure \- \9. It consists of a battery and a  resistance connected through a sw itch to a pair of smooth, frictionless rails. Along  the bed of this "rai lroad track" is a constant, uni form-density ma gnetic field di­ rected into the page. A bar of conduct
ing metal is lying across the tracks.  H ow does such a strange device behave? Its behavior can be determined  from an application of four basic equations to the ma chine. T hese equations are  I. T he equation for the force on a wire in the presence ofa ma gnetic field:  F i (I X B ) I (1-43)  where F = force on wire  i = ma gnitude of currenl in wire  I = length of wire, with direction of! defined to be in the direction  of current now  B = ma gnetic nux density vector  2. T he equation for th
e voltage induced on a wire m oving in a ma gnelic field:  l e;Dd (vXB ) -1  where e;Dd = voltage induced in wire  v = velocity of the wire  B = ma gnetic nux density vector  I = length of conductor in the ma gnelic field  (1-45)  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 37  ~o  R  • , x x X  i (/)  + - Find -=-VB e;!!d ,.  X X X  FIGU R E 1-10  Starting a linear dc machine.  3. Kirchhoff's voltage law for Ihis ma chine. From Figure J- J9lhis law gives  VB - iR - ei!!d = 0  (1-46)  4. Newt on's 
law for the bar across the tracks:  (1- 7)  W e will now explore the fundam ental behavior of this simple dc ma chine  using these four equations as lools.  Starting the Linear DC M achine  Figure 1-20 show s the linear dc ma chine under starting conditions. To start this  ma chine, simply close the sw itch. Now a currenl flows in the bar, which is given  by Kirchhoff's voltage law:  (1-47)  Since the bar is initially at rest, e;Dd = 0, so i = VBIR. T he current flows down  through the bar acros
s the tracks. But from Equation (1- 43), a currenl flowing  Ihrough a wire in the presence ofa ma gnetic field induces a force on Ihe wire. Be­ cause of the geometry of the ma chine, this force is  Find = ilB to the right (1-48)  T herefore, the bar will accelerale to the right (by Newt on's law). H owever,  when Ihe velocity of the bar begins 10 increase, a voltage appears across the bar.  T he voltage is given by Equation (1-45), which reduces for this geom etry to  e;Dd = vBI positive upward 
(1-49)  T he voliage now reduces the current flow ing in the bar, since by Kirch­ hoff's voliage law  38 ELECIRI C MA C HINERY FUNDAMENT ALS  v (t)  V,  BI  o  e;oo (t)  V,  o  i (t)  V,  R  o  F;oo (t)  VBIB  R  o  (a)  'hI  "I  ,dl  ""GURE 1-21  The linear de machine on starting.  (a) Velocity v(t) as a function of time;  (b) induced voltage e .... (/); (c) currem i(t);  (d) induced force Fu.il).  (1-47)  As eioo increases, the current i decreases.  TIle result of this action is that eventuall
y the bar wi ll reach a constant  steady-state speed where the net force on the bar is zero. TIlis will occur wh en eioo  has risen all the way up to equal the voltage VB. At that time, the bar will be mov­ ing at a speed given by  VB = e;Dd = v"BI  V,  v'" = BI (I-50)  TIle bar will continue to coast along at this no-load speed forever unless some ex­ ternal force disturbs it. When the m otor is started, the velocity v, induced voltage  eiDd, current i, and induced force Find are as sketched in
 Figure 1-21.  To summariz e, at starting, the linear dc ma chine behaves as follows :  I, Closing the switch produces a current flow i = VB /R.  2, Th e current flow produces a force on the bar given by F = ilB.  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 39  R  "  i (/) X X X  + - F ;md _ fo'_ e;md I ,  X X X  FIGU R E 1-22  Th e linear dc machine as a motor.  3. The bar accelerales to the right, producing an induced voltage e;md as it  speeds up.  4. lllis induced voltage reduces the current fl
ow i = (VB - e;Dd t)! R.  5. The induced force is thus decreased (F = i J.IB) until eventually F = o.  At that point, e;Dd = VB , i = 0, and the bar mov es at a constant no-load speed  v" = VB ! BI.  T his is precisely the behavior observed in real motors on starting.  Th e Linear DC Ma chine as a M olor  Assume that the linear ma chine is initially running at the no-load steady-state con­ ditions described above. What will happen to this ma chine if an external load is  applied to it? To find o
ut, let's examine Figure 1-22. H ere, a force Fto.d is applied  to the bar opposite the direction of motion. Since the bar was initially at steady  state, application of the force Ftoad will result in a net force on the bar in the direc­ tion opposite the direction of m otion (F Del = Fto.d - Find). T he effect of this force  will be to slow the bar. But just as soon as the bar begins to slow down, the in­ duced voltage on the bar drops (e;Dd = vJ.BI). A s the induced voltage decreases,  the cur
rent flow in the bar rises:  (1-47)  1l1erefore, the induced force rises too (Find = itIB ). T he overall result of this  chain of events is that the induced force rises until it is equal and opposite to the  load force, and the bar again travels in steady state, but at a lowe r speed. When a  load is attached to the bar, the velocity v, induced voltage eind, current i, and in­ duced force Find are as sketched in Figure 1-23.  1l1ere is now an induced force in the direction of motion of the bar,
 and  power is being convenedJrom electricalfonn to mechanical Jonn to keep the bar  m oving. T he power being converted is  40 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  v (I)  V,  BI  o  eiOO (I)  V,  o  j (I)  F  BI  o  FiOO (I)  F~  o  '"  'hI  '<I  ,dl  ""GURE 1-23  The linear de machine operating at no-load  conditions and then loaded as a motor.  (a) Velocity '01(1) as a function of time;  (b) induced voltage e..JI); (c) current i(I);  (d) induced force Fu.il).  (I-51)  An amount of electric power 
equal to eindi is consum ed in the bar and is replaced  by m echanical power equal to Findv, Since power is converted from electrical 10  m echanical form, this bar is operating as a motor.  To summari ze this behavior:  I. A force ~oad is applied opposite to the direction of motion, which causes a net  force F ... , opposite 10 the direction of m otion.  2. The resulting acceleration a = Fo .. /m is negalive, so the bar slows down (vJ.).  3. The voltage eiod = vJ.Bl falls, and so i = (VB - eiod
J.YR increases.  4. Th e induced force F iod = itlB increases until I F iod I = I Ftoad I at a lower  speed v.  5. An amount of electric power equal to eiodi is now being converted to me­ chanical power equal to fiodV, and the ma chine is acting as a m otor.  A real dc m olor behaves in a precisely analogous fashion when it is loaded:  As a load is added to its shaft, the m otor begins to slow down, which reduces its in­ ternal voltage, increasing its current now . The increased currenl flow inc
reases its  induced torque, and the induced lorque wi ll equal the load torque of the m otor at a  new , slowe r speed.  INTRODUcnONTO MAC HINERY PRI NC IPL ES 41  R  " - x x X i (t)  ~=- V + F --, Fjmd '00 I ~  - ,  x x x  ""GU R E 1-24  Th e linear de machine as a generator.  Note that the power converted from electrical form 10 m echanical form by  this linear motor was given by the equation P coo¥ = F ;"dV, T he power converted  from electrical form to m echanical form in a real rotaling m o
tor is given by the  equation  (I-52)  where the induced torque "TjDd is the rotational analog of the induced force FjDd, and  Ihe angular velocity w is the rotational analog of the linear velocity v.  Th e Linear DC Ma chine as a Gen erator  Suppose that the linear machine is again operating under no-load steady-state con­ ditions. T his time, apply a force in the direction of motion and see what happens.  Figure \-24 shows the linear ma chine with an applied force Fapp in the di­ rection of mo
tion. N ow the applied force will cause the bar to accelerate in the  direction of m otion, and Ihe velocity v of the bar will increase. As Ihe velocity  increases, ejmd = vtBI will increase and will be larger than Ihe ballery voltage VB'  With eind > VB, the currenl reverses direction and is now given by the equation  . eiDd - VB  ,~  R (I-53)  Since this current now flows up through the bar, it induces a force in the bar  given by  F ind = ilB to Ihe left (I-54)  TIle direction of the induced 
force is given by the right-hand rule. TIlis induced  force opposes the applied force on the bar.  Finally, the induced force will be equal and opposite to the applied force,  and the bar wi ll be m oving at a higher speed than before. N otice Ihat now the bat­ tery is charging. T he linear ma chine is now serving as a generator, converting me­ chanical power Findv into electric power ejDdi.  To summarize this behavior:  42 ELECIRI C M AC HINERY FUND A MENT ALS  I. A force F app is applied in th
e direction of motion; F oet is in the direction of  m otion.  2. Acce leration a = F"",/m is positive, so the bar speeds up (vt).  3. Th e voltage eiod = vtBl increases, and so i = (eiod t-VB YR increases.  4. Th e induced force F ;od = itlB increases until I Find I = I Fload I at a higher  speed v.  5. An amo unt of mechanical power equal to F ;odv is now being converted to  electric power e;odi, and the ma chine is acting as a generator.  Again, a real dc generator behaves in precisely this m
ann er: A torque is ap­ plied to the shaft in the direction of motion, the speed of the shaft increases, the in­ ternal voltage increases, and current flows out of the generator to the loads. The  amount of mechanical power converted to electrical form in the real rotating gen­ erator is again given by Equ ation (I-52):  (I-52)  It is interesting that the sam e ma chine acts as both motor and generator. The  only difference between the two is whether the externally applied forces are in the  dir
ection of m otion (generator) or opposite to the direction of motion (m otor).  Electrically, when eind > VB, the ma chine acts as a generator, and when e iod < VB,  the ma chine acts as a m otor. Wh ether the ma chine is a m otor or a generator, both  induced force (m otor action) and induced voltage (generator action) are present at  all times. nlis is generally true of all machines- both actions are present, and it is  only the relative directions of the external forces with respect to the di
rection of  m otion that determine whether the overall ma chine behaves as a m otor or as a  generator.  Another very interesting fact should be noted: This ma chine was a genera­ tor w hen it m oved rapidly and a m otor when it m oved m ore slow ly, but w hether it  was a m otor or a generator, it always m oved in the sam e direction. M any begin­ ning ma chinery students expect a ma chine to turn one way as a generator and the  other way as a m otor. This does not occur. Instead, there is m er
ely a small change  in operating speed and a reversal of current flow .  Starting Problems with the Linear Machine  A linear ma chine is show n in Figure 1-25. This ma chine is supplied by a 250-V  dc source, and its internal resistance R is given as about 0.10 n. (1lle resistor R  mod els the internal resistance of a real dc ma chine, and this is a fairly reasonable  internal resistance for a medium -size dc m otor.)  Providing actual numbers in this figure highlights a major problem with ma ­ 
chines (and their simple linear model). At starting conditions, the speed of the bar  is zero, so eind = O. TIle current flow at starting is  . VB 250 V  Isu.n=R" = 0.1 n = 2500 A  FIGURE 1-15  o.lOn  " -i (I)  INTR ODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRIN C IPLES 43  U =0.5 T .  directed into the page  x x X  0.5 m  X X X  The linear dc machine with componem values illustrating the problem of excessive starting currem.  fa  o.lOn  "  i (t)  -=-VB =250V  FIGURE 1-16  R",.,  " X X X  0.5 m  X X X  A linear dc 
machine with an extra series resistor inserted to control the starting currem.  This current is very high, often in excess of 10 times the rated current of the ma ­ chine. Such currents can cause severe damage to a m otor. B oth real ac and real dc  ma chines suffer from similar high-currenl problem s on starting.  H ow can such damage be prevented? TIle easiest method for this simple lin­ ear ma chine is 10 insert an extra resistance into Ihe circuit during starting 10 limit  the current flow u
ntil ej!>d builds up enough to limit it. Figure \-26 shows a start­ ing resistance inserted into the ma chine circuitry.  Th e sam e problem exists in real dc ma chines, and it is handled in precisely  Ihe same fashion-a resistor is inserted into Ihe m otor annature circuit during  starting. TIle control of high starting current in real ac ma chines is handled in a  different fashion, which will be described in Chapter 8.  EXllmple 1-10. The linear dc ma chine shown in Figure 1-27a has a battery
 volt­ age of 120 V. an internal resistance of 0.3 n. and a ma gnetic flux density of 0.1 T.  (a) What is this machine's maximum starting current? What is its steady-state  velocity at no load?  (b) Suppose that a 30-N force pointing to the right were applied to the bar. What  would the steady-state speed be? H ow mu ch power would the bar be producing  or consruning? H ow mu ch power would the battery be producing or consuming?  44 ELECIR IC M AC HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS  -=-120V  -::~ 120V  -::
~ 120V  ""G UR E \-27  0.30  "  0.30  0.30  - x  X  "J  X  F oo 30 N  X  'bJ  X  F toad=30 N  X  ,< J  U =O.1 T .  directed into the JX1ge  X X  10m  X X  U =O.1 T .  directed into the JX1ge  X X  + - F 'PP-3O N e;nd  - ,  X X  U =O.1 T .  directed into the JX1ge  X X  + - F ;nd-3O N e;nd  - ,  X X  The linear de machine of Ex ample 1- 10. (a) Starting conditions; (b) operating as a generator;  (e) operating as a motor.  E xplain the difference betwee n these two figures. Is this m achine acting
 as a  m otor or as a generator?  (c) N ow suppose a 30-N force pointing to the left w ere applied to the bar. Wh at wo uld  the new steady-state speed be? Is this m achine a mo tor or a generntor now?  (d) A ssrune that a force pointing to the left is applied to the bar. Calculate speed of  the bar as a flUlction of the force for values from 0 N to 50 N in IO-N steps. Plot  the velocity of the bar versus the applied force.  (e) Assum e that the bar is lUlloaded and that it suddenly nm s into a 
region w here the  m agnetic field is wea kened to 0.08 T. H ow fast w ill the bar go now?  Solutioll  (a) At starting conditions, the velocity o f the bar is 0, so em = O. Th erefore,  i = VB - eiAd = l20Y - OV = 400 A  R 0.30  INTR O DUCTI O N T O M AC HINERY PRIN C IPLES 45  Wh en the mac hine reaches steady state, Find = 0 and i = O. Th erefore,  VB = eind = v,J31  V,  v ... = BI  120 V  = (0.1 T X lOm ) = 120ml s  (b) R efer to Figure 1-27b. If a 30-N force to the right is applied to the ba
r, the final  steady state w ill occur w hen the induced force Find is equal and opposite to the  applied force F OPP' so that the net force on the bar is zero:  F.pp = F ind = ilB  Th erefore,  . Find 30 N  1 = IB = (IOm Xo.l T)  = 30 A flow ing up through the bar  Th e induced voltage eind on the bar mu st be  eind= VB+i R  = 120 V + (30A X0.3 0 ) = 129 V  and the final steady-state speed mu st be  ,~  v" =m  129 V  = (0.1 T X lOm ) = 129m1 s  Th e bar is producing P = (129 V X30 A ) = 3870 W 
of powe r, and the battery is  consuming P = (120 V X30 A ) = 3600 W. The difference betwee n these two num ­ bers is the 270 W of losses in the resistor. This m achine is acting as a generator.  (c) R efer to Figure 1-25c. This time, the force is applied to the left, and the induced  force is to the right. At steady state,  Fopp = Find = ilB  . Find 30 N  1 = IB = (IO m XO .IT)  = 30 A flow ing dow n through the bar  Th e induced voltage eind on the bar mu st be  eind= VB - iR  = 120 V - (30 A 
X0.3 0 ) = III V  and the final speed m ust be  ,~  v .. = m  11I V  = (0.1 T X IO m ) = 111 mls  This m achine is now acting as a motor, converting electric energy from the bat­ tery into m echanical energy of motion on the bar.  46 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  (d) This task is ideally suited for MAT L A B . We can take advantage ofMATLAB's  vectoriled calculations to detennine the velocity of the bar for each value of  force. The MATLAB code to perform this calculation is just a version
 of the  steps that were performed by hand in part c. The program shown below calcu­ lates the current, induced voltage, and velocity in that order, and then plots the  velocity versus the force on the bar.  % M -file, exl_ 1 0 .m  % M -file to calcu late and p lo t the veloci ty o f  fun c t io n of load . % a linear motor as a  V B = 1 20;  r = 0 .3;  % Battery vo ltage (V)  % R esis tance (ohms )  1 = 1 ;  B = 0 .6;  % Se lect the  F = 0,1 0,50;  • Ca lcu late  1 0 , . / (1  • Ca lcu late  e 
ind = V B - • Ca lcu late  v_ba r 0 eind  % Bar length (m )  % Flux density (T )  forces to app l y to  •  the bar  Force (N )  'he currents fl ow i ng 1 0 'he m o to r.  • B ) ; • CU rrent (A )  'ho indu ced vo l tages 0 0 'ho bar.  i • c, • Indu ced vo ltage  'ho velocities of the bar.  . / (1 • B ) ; % Ve loci ty (m / s)  % Plot the veloci ty of the bar versu s fo rce.  p lot(F ,v_bar );  t itle ('Plot of Ve loci ty ve rsu s App lied Fo rce');  x label ('Force (N )');  y label ('Veloci ty (m 
/ s)');  axis ([0 500 200 ]);  (V)  The resulting plot is shown in Figure 1-28. Note that the bar slows down more  and more as load increases.  (e) If the bar is initially unloaded, then eind = VB. If the bar suddenly hits a region  of weaker magnetic field, a transient will occur. Once the transient is over,  though, eind will again equal VB.  This fact can be used to determine the final speed of the bar. The initial speed was  120 rnls. The final speed is  VB = eind = vllBl  V,  v .. = Bl  120
 V  = (0.08 TXIO m ) = 150 mls  Thu s, when the flux in the linear motor weakens, the bar speeds up. The same behavior oc­ curs in real dc motors: When the field flux of a dc motor weakens, it turns faster. H ere,  again, the linear machine behaves in much the same way as a real dc motor.  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PR INC IPL ES 47  200  ISO  160  140  ~ 120  60  40  20  0 o  F IGU R E 1-28  , \0 15 20 25  Force (N )  Plot of velocity versus force for a linear de machine.  ~ ,  30  1.9 R E AL ,
 R E A C TlV E ,A ND A PPARENT  POWER IN AC C IRC UIT S  ,  40 45 50  In a dc circuit such as Ihe one show n in Figure l-29a, the power supplied to the  dc load is simply Ihe product of the voltage across the load and the current flow­ ing through it.  p = VI (I-55)  Unfortunately, the situation in sinusoidal ac circuits is m ore complex, be­ cause there can be a phase difference between the ac voltage and the ac currenl  supplied to Ihe load. TIle instantaneous power supplied to an ac load will
 still be  Ihe product of the instantaneous voltage and the instantaneous currenl, but the av­ erage power supplied 10 the load wi ll be affected by the phase angle between the  voltage and the current. W e will now explore the effects of this phase difference  on the average power supplied to an ac load.  Figure l-29b shows a single-phase voltage source supplying power 10 a  single-phase load with impedance Z = Z L O O. If we assume that the load is in­ ductive, then the impedance angle 0 of th
e load will be positive, and the currenl  will lag the voltage by 0 degrees.  The voltage applied to this load is  vet) = yI1V cos wi (I-56)  48 ELECIRI C M AC HINERY FUND A MENT ALS  1  v +  ) - 1  1  + v(t)  '" - 1  I  (a)  1-/ L 0° - - V = VLO"  'hI  I  R  I  I  Z  I  z = Z L 0 ""GU R E 1-29  (a) A de voltage source supplying a  load with resistance R. (b) An ac  voltage source supplying a load with  impedance Z = Z L (J fl.  where V is the nns value of the voltage applied to the load, and th
e resulting cur­ rent flow is  i(t) = V2I COS( wl - ())  where I is the rm s value of the current flowing through the load.  1lle instantaneous power supplied to this load at any time t is  pet) = v(t)i(t) = 2VI cos w t COS( wl - ())  (I-57)  (I-58)  1lle angle () in this equation is the impedance angle of the load. For inductive  loads, the impedance angle is positive, and the current waveform lags the voltage  waveform by () degrees.  Ifw e apply trigonometric identities to Equation (1-58), it
 can be manipu­ lated into an expression of the form  pet) = VI cos () (1 + cos 2wt) + VI sin () sin 2wt (I-59)  1lle first tenn of this equation represents the power supplied to the load by the  comp onent of current that is in phase with the voltage, whi le the second tenn rep­ resents the power supplied to the load by the comp onent of current that is 90° out  of phase with the voltage. Th e comp onents of this equation are plotted in Figure  1-30.  Note that the first term of the instantaneo
us power expression is always pos­ itive, but it produces pulses of power instead of a constant value. The average  value of this term is  p = Vl cos () (1-60)  which is the average or real power (P) supplied to the load by term 1 of the Equa­ tion (I-59). The units of real power are watts (W ), where 1 W = 1 V X 1 A.  INTR ODUCTION TO MACHINERY PRINCIPLES 49  p(' 1  Component I  /\/ f\ f\ f  , ,  "  ,  , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , C omponent 2 , , ,  0  , , , , , , ,  \,~2 I 
0 ,2 , 4  , 6' • , 10 w  o. ,  , , , , ,  "  ""GURE 1-30  Th e components of power supplied to a single-phase load versus time. Th e first component represents  the power supplied by the component of current j" phase with the voltage. while the second term  represents the power supplied by the component of current 90° OUI Of phase with the voltage.  N ole that Ihe second tenn of the instantaneous power expression is positive  half of the time and negative half of the time, so Ihal the average po
wer supplied  by this term is zero. This tenn represents power that is first transferred from the  source 10 Ihe load, and then returned from Ihe load to the source. Th e power that  continually bounces back and forth between the source and the load is known as re­ active power (Q ). Reactive power represents the energy thai is first stored and then  released in the ma gnelic field of an inductor, or in the electric field of a capacitor.  Th e reactive power of a load is given by  Q = v/sin() (1
-61)  where () is the impedance angle of the load. By convention, Q is positive for in­ ductive loads and negative for capacitive loads, because Ihe impedance angle () is  positive for inductive loads and negative for capacitive loads. TIle units of reac­ tive power are voH-amperes reactive (var), where I var = 1 V X 1 A. Even though  the dimensional units are the sam e as for watts, reactive power is traditionally  given a unique name to distinguish it from power actually supplied 10 a load.  T
Ile apparent power (S) supplied to a load is defined as the product of the  voHage across the load and the current Ihrough the load. TIlis is the power thai  "appears" to be supplied to the load if the phase angle differences between volt­ age and current are ignored. Th erefore, the apparenl power of a load is given by  50 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  S = V[ (1-62)  1lle units of apparent power are volt-amperes (VA ), where I VA = I V X 1 A. As  with reactive power, apparent power is given 
a distinctive set of units to avoid  confusing it with real and reactive power.  Alternative Form s of the Power Equations  Ifa load has a constant impedance, then Ohm 's law can be used to derive alterna­ tive expressions for the real, reactive, and apparent powers supplied to the load.  Since the ma gnitude of the voltage across the load is given by  V = JZ (1-63)  substituting Equation (1--63) into Equations (1--60) to (1--62) produces equations  for real, reactive, and apparent power express
ed in tenns of current and impedance:  P = [lZcos ()  Q = [lZ sin ()  S = [lZ  where Izi is the ma gnitude of the load impedance Z.  Since the impedance of the load Z can be expressed as  Z ~ R + jX ~ Izl co, 0 + j Izl 'in 0  (1-64)  (1-65)  (1-66)  we see from this equation that R = Izi cos () and X = Izi sin (), so the real and  reacti ve powers of a load can also be expressed as  where R is the resistance and X is the reactance of load Z.  Complex Power  (1-67)  (1-68)  For simplicity in comp
uter calculations, real and reactive power are som etimes  represented together as a complex power S , where  s ~ P + jQ (1-69)  1lle complex power S supplied to a load can be calculated from the equation  S = VI * (1-70)  where the asterisk represents the complex conjugate operator.  To understand this equation, let's suppose that the voltage applied to a load  is V = V L a and the current through the load is I = [ L {3. 1llen the complex  power supplied to the load is  INTRODUcnONTO MAC HINERY
 PRI NC IPL ES 51  p  - -1 - + 1 Q  (~ v z Z = Izi Lon  T -I  FIGU R E 1-31  An inductive load has a posilil'e impedance angle (J. This load produces a lngging current. and it  consumes both real power P and reactive power Q from the source.  S = V I* = (V L a )(JL-f3) = VI L(a - (3)  = VI cos(a - (3) + jVI sin(a - (3)  T he impedance angle () is the difference between the angle of the voltage and the  angle of the current (() = a - /3), so this equation reduces to  S = VI cos () + jVI sin ()  ~
 P +jQ  Th e R elationships between Imp ed ance A ngle,  C urrent A ngle, and P ow er  A s we know from basic circuit theory, an inductive load (Figure 1-3 1) has a pos­ itive impedance angle (), since the reactance of an inductor is positive. If the im­ pedance angle () of a load is positive. the phase angle of the current flowing  through the load will lag the phase angle of the voltage across the load by ().  I = V = VLoo= ~L_()  Z IzlL6 Izl  Also, if the impedance angle () of a load is posit
ive, the reactive power consum ed  by the load wi ll be positive (Equation 1-65), and the load is said to be consuming  both real and reactive power from the source.  In contrast, a capacitive load (Figure 1-32) has a negative impedance  angle (), since the reactance of a capacitor is negative. If the impedance angle () of  a load is negative, the phase angle of the current flowing through the load wi ll  lead the phase angle of the voltage across the load by (). Also, if the impedance an­ gie (
) of a load is negative, the reactive power Q consum ed by the load will be  negative (Equation 1-65). In this case, we say that the load is consuming real  power from the source and supplying reactive power to the source.  Th e P ow er Triangle  T he real, reactive, and apparent powers supplied to a load are related by the power  triangle. A power triangle is shown in Figure 1-33. T he angle in the lower left  52 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  p  - -1 - + I Q  +  rv v z Z = 121 Lon  - 1 -I
  ""GU R E 1-32  A capacitive loo.d has a nega/il'e impedance angle (j, This load produces a leading current, and it  consumes real pO\\'er P from the source and while supplying reactive power Q to the source,  s Q = SsinO  o  P = ScosO  p  cosO =­S  sinO = SJ S  tanO = ~ FIGURE 1-33  The power triangle,  corner is the impedance angle (), T he adjacent side of Ihis triangle is Ihe real  power P supplied to the load, the opposite side of the triangle is the reactive power  Q supplied to the load,
 and the hypotenuse of the triangle is the apparent power S  of the load,  1lle quantity cos () is usually known as the power factor of a load, T he  power factor is defined as the fraction of the apparent power S that is actually sup­ plying real power to a load, TIlUS,  PF = cos () (1-71)  where () is the impedance angle of the load,  Note that cos () = cos (-()), so the power factor produced by an impedance  angle of +30° is exactly the sam e as the powe r factor produced by an impedance  ang
le of -30°, Because we can't tell whether a load is inductive or capacitive  from the power factor alone, it is customary to state whether the current is leading  or lagging the voltage whenever a power factor is quoted,  TIle power triangle mak es the relationships among real power, reactive  power, apparent power, and the power factor clear, and provides a convenient way  to calculate various power-related quantities if some of them are know n,  Exa mpl e I-II. Figure 1-34 show s an ac voltage
 source supplying power to a load  with impedance Z = 20L - 30° n. Calculate the current I supplied to the load, the power  factor of the load, and the real, reactive, apparent, and complex power supplied to the load,  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PR INC IPL ES 53  -1 I  +  '"  \' = 120LO"V Z Z = 20L - 30"n  - T I  F IGU R E 1-34  The circuit of Ex ample I- II.  Solutioll  The current supplied to this load is  I = V = 120LO ° V = 6L300 A  Z 20L 300 n  The power factor of the load is  PF = cos (J =
 cos (-30°) = 0.866 leading (1-71)  (Note that this is a capacitive load, so the impedance angle (J is negative, and the current  leads the voltage.)  The real power supplied to the load is  P = Vlcos (J  P = (120 VX6A) cos (-30°) = 623.5 W  The reactive power supplied to the load is  Q=Vlsin(J  Q = (120 V)(6A) sin (-30°) = -360 VAR  The apparent power supplied to the load is  S = VI  Q = (120 V)(6A) = 720 VA  The complex power supplied to the load is  S = V I*  1.10 SU MMARY  = (l20LOOV)(6L-30°
 A)*  = (l20LO° V)(6L30 ° A) = 720L30° VA  = 623.5 - j360 VA  (1-60)  (1-61)  (1-62)  (1-70)  T his chapter has reviewed briefly the me chanics of systems rotating about a sin­ gle axis and introduced the sources and effects of ma gnetic fields important in the  understanding of transformers, motors, and generators.  H istorically, the English system of units has been used to mea sure the  m echanical quantities associated with ma chines in En glish-speaking countries.  54 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUN
DAMENTALS  R ecently, the 51 units have superseded the En glish system almost everywhere in  the world except in the United States, but rapid progress is being made even there.  Since 51 is becoming almost universal, m ost (but not all) of the examp les in this  book use this system of units for me chanical measurements. Electrical quantities  are always m easured in 51 units.  I n the section on mechanics, the concepts of angu lar position, angular veloc­ ity, angular acceleration, torque, Newt
 on's law, work, and power were explained  for the special case of rotation about a single axis. Some fundamental relationships  (such as the power and speed equations) were given in both 51 and English units.  TIle prOOuction of a ma gnetic field by a current was explained, and the spe­ cial properties of ferromagnetic materials w ere explored in detail. Th e shape of the  ma gnetization curve and the concept of hysteresis were explained in term s of the  domain theory of ferromagnetic material
s, and eddy current losses were discussed.  Faraday's law states that a voltage will be generated in a coil of wire that is  proportional to the time rate of change in the flux passing through it. Faraday's  law is the basis oftransfonner action, which is explored in detail in Chapter 3.  A current-carrying wire present in a ma gnetic field, if it is oriented properly,  wi ll have a force induced on it. This behavior is the basis of motor action in all  real ma chines.  A wire m oving through a 
ma gnetic field with the proper orientation will  have a voltage induced in it. TIlis behavior is the basis of generator action in all  real ma chines.  A simple linear dc ma chine consisting of a bar m oving in a ma gnetic field  illustrates many of the features of real m otors and generators. When a load is at­ tached to it, it slows down and operates as a m otor, converting electric energy into  m echanical energy. Wh en a force pulls the bar faster than its no-load steady-state  speed, it ac
ts as a generator, converting m echanical energy into electric energy.  In ac circuits, the real power P is the average power supplied by a source to  a load. TIle reactive powe r Q is the compon ent of power that is exchanged back  and forth between a source and a load. By convention, positive reactive power is  consum ed by inductive loads (+ 0) and negative reactive powe r is consum ed (or  positive reactive power is supplied) by capacitive loads (-0). TIle apparent power  S is the power that
 "appears" to be supplied to the load if only the ma gnitudes of  the voltages and currents are considered.  QUESTIONS  I-I. What is torque? What role does torque play in the rotational motion of machines?  1-2. What is Ampere 's law?  1-3. What is magnetizing intensity? What is magnetic flux density? H ow are they related?  1-4. H ow does the magnetic circuit concept aid in the design of transformer and machine  cores?  1-5. What is reluctance?  1-6. What is a ferromagnetic material? Why is the
 permeability of ferromagnetic mate­ rials so high?  INTRODUCTION TO MAC HINERY PR INC IPL ES 55  1-7. H ow does the relative penneability of a ferromagnetic material vary with magneto­ motive force?  1-8. What is hysteresis? Explain hysteresis in tenns of magnetic domain theory.  1-9. What are eddy current losses? What can be done to minimize eddy current losses in  a core?  1- 10. Why are all cores exposed to ac flux variations laminated?  I- II. What is Faraday's law?  1- 12. What conditions 
are necessary for a magnetic field to produce a force on a wire?  1- 13. What conditions are necessary for a magnetic field to produce a voltage in a wire?  1- 14. Why is the linear machine a good example of the behavior observed in real dc  machines?  1- 15, The linear machine in Figure 1- 19 is running at steady state. What would ha~n to  the bar if the voltage in the battery were increased? Explain in detail.  1- 16. Just how does a decrease in flux produce an increase in speed in a linear ma
chine ?  1- 17, Will current be leading or lagging voltage in an inductive load? Will the reactive  power of the load be positive or negative?  1- 18. What are real, reactive, and apparent power? What lUlits are they measured in? H ow  are they related?  1- 19. What is power factor?  PROBL E MS  1- 1. A motor 's shaft is spinning at a speed of 3000 r/min. What is the shaft speed in  radians per second?  1-2. A flywheel with a moment of inertia of 2 kg 0 m 2 is initially at rest. If a torque of  
5 N o m (cOlUlterc1ockwise) is suddenly applied to the flywheel, what will be the  speed of the flywheel after 5 s? Express that speed in both radians per second and  revolutions per minute.  1-3. A force of 10 N is applied to a cylinder, as shown in Figure PI- I. What are the mag­ nitude and direction of the torque produced on the cylinder? What is the angular ac­ celeration a of the cylinder?  3D'  ,  r= 0.25 m  J=5k:so m 2  F = ION  fo'IGUR E 1'1-1  The cylinder of Problem \-3.  56 ELECIR IC 
M AC HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS  1-4. A m otor is supplying 60 N · m of torque to its load. If the m otor's shaft is turning at  1800 r/min. w hat is the m echanical pow er supplied to the load in wa tts? In horse­ powe r?  1-5. A ferrom agnetic core is show n in Figure PI-2. Th e depth of the core is 5 cm. Th e  other dimensions of the core are as shown in the figure. Find the value of the current  that w ill produce a flux of 0.005 Wb. With this current. what is the flux density at  the top of th
e core? Wh at is the flux density at the right side of the core? Assrune  that the relative perm eability of the core is I()(x).  I. I' ,m 1 r lOem - i---20 cm ---+-=~- T ", m  ; [.  + - I-e--- - ---- - - --- - 400 turns ", m  - - -- - - - I-e- [. ", m  1  Core depth - 5 em  fo'IGURE P I-2  Th e core of Problems 1-5 and 1- 16.  1-6. A ferrom agnetic core w ith a relative perm eability of 1500 is show n in Figure PI-3.  Th e dimensions are as show n in the diagram . and the depth of the core is 7
 cm. Th e  air gaps on the left and right sides of the core are 0.070 and 0.050 cm . respectively.  B ecause of fringing effects. the effective area of the air gaps is 5 percent larger than  their physical size. If there are 400 IlU1lS in the coil wrapped arOlUld the center leg  of the core and if the current in the coil is 1.0 A. w hat is the flux in each of the left.  center. and right legs of the core? Wh at is the flux density in each air gap?  1-7. A two-legged core is show n in Figure PI-4
. Th e winding on the left leg of the core  (Nt) has 400 turns. and the winding on the right (N2) has 300 turns. Th e coils are  wo und in the directions show n in the figure. If the dimensions are as shown . then  w hat flux wo uld be produced by currents il = 0.5 A and i2 = 0.75 A ? A ssum e I-L, =  J(XXl and constant.  1-8. A core w ith three legs is show n in Figure PI-5. Its depth is 5 cm . and there are 200  IlU1lS on the leftmost leg. Th e relative penneability of the core can be assruned
 to be  1500 and constant. Wh at flux exists in each of the three legs of the core? Wh at is the  flux density in each of the legs? A ssum e a 4 percent increase in the effective area of  the air gap due to fringing effects.  ---r  'om  - f- ;- ---- 400 turns JOcm - O.07cm 0.05 cm - -- - - - f- 'om  ---.L  Core depth = 7 em  H GU R E )'1-3  The core of Problem 1-6.  r--15 cm -+-------50'm -------+-15 Cffi---1  T  15 em  ; , ;,  -- - - --- - - -- - - - - 50 om - -- 400 turns 300 turns --- -- - - 
- - -N, N,  - - - ---- - - -- 15 em  ~  Core depth'" 15 em  FIGU R E PI-4  Th e core of Problems \-7 and \- 12.  57  58 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  ~r-25cm----t- 15cm-+---25'm---rl C9C,"m'-ll  T ',m  ;  - -2A -- - 200 turns - O.04cm -- --- t  25cm  + ',m  ~  Core depth = 5 cm  ""GURE P I-S  The core of Problem 1--8.  1-9. The wire shown in Figure PI--6 is carrying 5.0 A in the presence of a magnetic field.  Calculate the magnitude and direction of the force induced on the wire.  ---- 1= 
1 m  I  - b  n =O.25 T.  -----to the right  i=5.0A _ ""GU R E 1'1-6  A current-carrying wire in a  magnetic field (Problem 1-9).  1-10. The wire shown in Figure PI-7 is moving in the presence of a magnetic field. With  the information given in the figure. detennine the magnitude and direction of the in­ duced voltage in the wire.  I- II. Repeat Problem 1- 10 for the wire in Figure PI-8.  1-12. The core shown in Figure PI-4 is made of a steel whose magnetization curve is  shown in Figure PI-9. Re
peat Problem 1-7. but this time do not asswne a constant  value of Pro H ow mu ch flux is produced in the core by the currents specified? What  is the relative permeability of this core under these conditions? Wa s the asswnption  x x x  X X X  X X X  X X \'_5m1s  X X  X X  ,  {:O.Sm  INTRODUCTI O N T O M AC HINERY PR IN C IPL ES 59  x x x x  ~  45' ~  X  ~  X ~  ~  ~  X  ~  X X  , ~  ~  • / ' X x X  I=O.SOm  X X X X  X X  ')  X X HGUR E 1'1-7  A wire moving in a  magnetic field (Problem  0 ", 0
.25 T. into the page 1- 10).  lV=,mlS  U =O.5 T  HGUR E "1-8  A wire moving in a magnetic field  (Problem I- II).  in Problem 1-7 that the relative penneability was equal to 1()(x) a good assumption  for these conditions? Is it a goo d assumption in general?  1-13. A core w ith three legs is show n in Fig ure Pi- IO. Its depth is 8 em , and there are 400  turns on the center leg. Th e rem aining dim ensions are shown in the fig ure. Th e core  is composed of a steel having the m agnetization cur
ve show n in Figure I- Uk . An ­ swe r the follow ing questions about this core:  (a) Wh at current is required to produce a flux density of 0.5 T in the central1eg of  the core?  (b) Wh at current is required to produ ce a flux density of 1.0 T in the central leg of  the core? Is it twice the current in part (a)?  (c) Wh at are the reluctances of the central and right legs of the core under the con­ ditions in part (a)?  (d) Wh at are the reluctances of the central and right legs of the core un
der the con­ ditions in part (b)?  (e) Wh at conclusion can you m ake about reluctances in real m agnetic cores?  1- 14. A two- legged m agnetic core w ith an air gap is show n in Figure PI- II. Th e depth of  the core is 5 cm . the length of the air gap in the core is 0.06 cm . and the mun ber of  turns on the coil is I(x)(). Th e ma gnetization curve of the core material is show n in  60 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  1.00  E  • ~ 0.75  ." ,  ~  " B 0.50  "  0.25  0.0  100 1000  M agnetiz
ing intensity H (A ' turns/m)  ""GURE 1'1-9  The magnetization curve for the core material of Problems 1-12 and 1-14.  ;- N 400 turns  ~gCm 1-16cm -----1-8cm +-16C1l1 -+8cm -1  Depth'" 8 em  ""GURE P i-IO  The core of Problem 1- 13.  T 8cm  t 16 em  1  I  80m  -.L  Figure PI-9. A ssume a 5 percent increase in effective air-gap area to account for  fringing. H ow much current is required to produce an air-gap flux density of 0.5 T ?  What are the flux densities of the four sides of the core at th
at current? What is the  total flux present in the air gap?  INTRODUcnONTO MAC HINERY PR INC IPLES 61  T  \Oem  ; 1)- - --- ----- -- - ------ N: \,O(X) turns O06om 1= JOem  - - ------ --- - - - - I-f- \Oem  ~  L \0 em ~_---_ 30 em ------ll-;-:--ll r l 'om  Depth : 5 em  ""GURE Pl-ll  Th e core ofProbJem \- \4.  1- 15. A transformer core with an effective mean path length of JO in has a 300-tW1l coil  wrapped arOlUld one leg. Its cross-sectional area is 0.25 inl. and its magnetization  curve is s
hown in Figure 1- IOc. If current of 0.25 A is flowing in the coil. what is  the total flux in the core? What is the flux density?  1- 16. The core shown in Figure PI-2 has the flux cp shown in Figure PI- l2. Sketch the  voltage present at the terminals of the coil.  1- 17. Figure PI- 13 shows the core ofa simple dc motor. The magnetization curve for the  metal in this core is given by Figure I- JOc and d. A ssume that the cross-sectional  area of each air gap is 18 cm 2 and that the width of ea
ch air gap is 0.05 em. The ef­ fective diameter of the rotor core is 4 em.  (a) It is desired to build a machine with as great a flux density as possible while  avoiding excessive saturation in the core. What would be a reasonable maxi­ mum flux density for this core?  (b) What would be the total flux in the core at the flux density of part (a)?  (c) The maximum possible field current for this machine is I A. Select a reasonable  nwnber of turns of wire to provide the desired flux density while 
not exceeding  the maximum available current.  1- 18. A sswne that the voltage applied to a load is V = 208L -30° V and the current flow­ ing through the load is I = 5L 15° A.  (a) Calculate the complex power S consruned by this load.  (b) Is this load inductive or capacitive?  (c) Calculate the power factor of this load.  62 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  omo --------------------------------- 0.005  O~---}----'2 ----'3-'~"4----~5----"6C--->C---.8C---- f(ms)  - 0.005  - 0.010 --------------
-------------------- FIGU R E 1'1-12  Plot of flux 4> as a function of time for Problem 1- 16.  4,m  N=?  Ntums 4,m  Depth = 4cm  FIGU R E 1'1-13  The core of Problem 1- 17.  (d) Calculate the reactive power consmned or supplied by this load. Does the load  consume reactive power from the source or supply it to the source?  1- 19. Figure PI- 14 show s a simple single-phase ac power system with three loads. The  voltage source is V = l20LO ° V. and the impedances of the three loads are  2:J = 5L 
_90° n  Answer the following questions about this power system.  (a) As srune that the sw itch shown in the figure is open. and calculate the current I.  the power factor. and the real. reactive. and apparent power being supplied by  the load.  INTR O DUCTI O N T O M AC HINERY PR IN C IPL ES 63  (b) Assum e that the sw itch show n in the figure is closed, and calculate the current  I, the powe r factor, and the real, reactive, and apparent powe r being supplied by  the load.  (c) Wh at happened 
to the current flow ing from the source w hen the sw itch closed?  Wh y?  -1 +1 +1 +1  +  '"\., V z, Z, Z,  - T 1 1 1  FIG U R E P I- 14  Th e circuit of Problem 1- \9.  1-20. D em onstrate that Equation (I-59) can be derived from Equ ation (I-58) using the  simple trigonom etric identities:  pet) = v(t)i(t) = 2VI cos wt cos(wt - (J)  pet) = VI cos (J (I + cos 2wt) + VI sin e sin 2wt  (I-58)  (I-59)  1-21. Th e linear m achine show n in Figure PI- IS has a m agnetic flux density of 0.5 T  direct
ed into the page, a resistance of 0.25 n, a bar length I = 1.0 m , and a battery  voltage of 100 V.  (a) Wh at is the initial force on the bar at starting? Wh at is the initial current flow?  (b) Wh at is the no-load steady-state speed of the bar?  (c) If the bar is loaded w ith a force of 25 N opposite to the direction of motion,  w hat is the new steady-state speed? Wh at is the efficiency of the m achine under  these circrunstances?  1=0  1  0.25 n i  " - X  VB = \00 V -=- X  FIGU R E P I- IS
  Th e linear machine in Problem \-21.  1-22. A linear machine has the follow ing characteristics:  B = 0.33 T into page  1 = 0.5 m  R = 0.50n  VB = 120V  H =0.5 T  x X X  1m  X X X  64 ELECIRI C M AC HINERY FUND A MENT ALS  (a) If this bar has a load of 10 N attached to it opposite to the direction of motion,  w hat is the steady-state speed of the bar?  (b) If the bar nm s off into a region w here the flux density falls to 0.30 T, what hap­ pens to the bar? Wh at is its fm al steady-state spee
d?  (c) Suppose VB is now decreased to 80 V w ith everything else rem aining as in  part b. What is the new steady-state speed of the bar?  (d) From the results for parts band c, w hat are two m ethods of controlling the  speed of a linear machine (or a real dc m otor)?  REFERENCES  I. Alexander. Charles K ., and M atthew N . O. Sadiku: Fundamentals of Electric Circuits, M cGraw­ H ill. 2CXXl.  2. Beer. E , and E . Johnston. Jr.: Vector M echanicsfor Engineers: Dynamics, 6th ed., M cGraw-H ill. 
 N ew Yort.I997.  3. H ayt. W illiam H .: Engineering E lectromllgnetics, 5th ed .. M cGraw-H ill. New Yort. 1989.  4. M ulligan. J. E : Introductory College Physics, 2nd ed .. M cGraw- H ilL N ew York. 1991.  5. Sears. Francis W ., M ark W . Zemans ky. and H ugh D . Young: University Physics, A ddison-W esley.  Reading. M ass., 1982.  CHAPTER  2  TRANSFORMERS  A  transformer  is a d ev ice that changes ac el ec tric powe r at o ne  vo lt age  le vel to ac  el ec tric powe r  at  another vo lt a
ge level through the ac ti on of a ma gne ti c  fi eld.  It  co nsists of two  or  m ore  co ils  of  wire wrapped around a comm on ferromagnetic  co re.  These co il s are (usua ll y)  not directly co nn ected. The o nl y co nn ec ti on  be­ twecn  th e  co ils is the  co mm on m agnetic  nux  pre se nt  within the core.  FIGURE 2-1  Th e  fi rst practical modern transformer. built  by  William Stanley  in  1885. N ote that the core is made  up  of  individual sheets  of  metal (laminations).  
(Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  65   66 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  One of the transfonner windings is connected to a source of ac electric  power, and the second (and perhaps third) transformer winding supplies electric  power to loads. 1lle transfonner winding connected to the power source is called  the primary winding or input winding, and the winding connected to the loads is  called the secondnry winding or output winding. I f there is a third winding on the  transformer, it 
is called the tertiary winding.  2.1 WHY TRANSFORMERS ARE  IMPORTANT TO MODERN LIFE  TIle first power distribution system in the United States was a 120-V dc system in­ vented by Th oma s A. Edison to supply power for incandescent light bulbs. Edi­ son's first central power station went into operation in N ew York City in Septem­ ber 1882. Unfortunately, his powe r system generated and transmitted power at  such low voltages that very large currents were necessary to supply significant  amounts 
of power. The se high currents caused huge voltage drops and power  losses in the transmission lines, severely restricting the service area of a generat­ ing station. In the 1880s, central power stations were located every few city blocks  to overcome this problem. The fact that pow er could not be transmitted far with  low-vo ltage dc power systems meant that generating stations had to be small and  localized and so were relatively inefficient.  TIle invention of the transfonner and the concurr
ent development of ac  power sources eliminated forever these restrictions on the range and power level  of power systems. A transfonner ideally changes one ac voltage level to another  voltage level without affecting the actual power supplied. If a transfonner steps up  the voltage level of a circuit, it mu st decrease the current to keep the power into  the device equal to the power out of it. 1llcrefore, ac electric power can be gener­ ated at one central location, its voltage stepped up for 
transmission over long dis­ tances at very low losses, and its voltage stepped down again for fmal use. Since  the transmission losses in the lines of a powe r system are proportional to the  square of the current in the lines, raising the transmission voltage and reducing the  resulting transmission currents by a factor of 10 with transform ers reduces power  transmission losses by a factor of lOll Without the transfonner, it w ould simply  not be possible to use electric power in man y of the 
ways it is used today.  In a rmx:lern pow er system, electric power is generated at voltages of 12 to  25 kV. Transfonners step up the voltage to between 110 kV and nearly 1000 kV for  transmission over long distances at very low losses. Transfonners then step down  the voltage to the 12- to 34.5-kV range for local distribution and fmally pennit the  power to be used safely in home s, offices, and factories at voltages as low as 120 V.  2.2 TYPES AND CONSTRUCTION  OF TRANSFORMERS  Th e principal
 purpose of a transformer is to convert ac powe r at one voltage level  to ac power of the sam e frequency at another voltage level. T ransfonners are also  TRANSFORMER S 67  i, (I)  - -+/ \+  ") N, N, ) v, (t  \ .  HGURE 2-2  Core-foml transfomler construction.  used for a variety of other purposes (e.g., voltage samp ling, current samp ling, and  impedance transformation), but this chapter is primarily devoted to the power  transformer.  Powe r transfonners are constructed on one of two types 
of cores. One type  of construction consists of a simple rectangular laminated piece of steel with the  transformer windings wrapped around two sides of the rectangle. This type of  construction is know n as corefonn and is illustrated in Figure 2-2. The other type  consists of a three-legged laminated core with the windings wrapped around the  center leg. nlis type of construction is know n as shell form and is illustrated in  Figure 2-3. In either case, the core is constructed of thin laminati
ons electrically  isolated from each other in order to minimize eddy currents.  Th e primary and secondary windings in a physical transform er are wrapped  one on top of the other with the low-vo ltage winding innermost. Such an arrange­ m ent serves two purposes:  I. It simplifies the problem of insu lating the high-voltage winding from the core.  2. It results in mu ch less leakage nux than would be the case if the two windings  were separated by a distance on the core.  Powe r transformers ar
e given a variety of different nam es, depending on  their use in power systems. A transformer connected to the output of a generator  and used to step its voltage up to transmission levels (110+ kV ) is som etimes  called a unit transformer. The transfonner at the other end of the transmission line,  which steps the voltage down from transmission levels to distribution levels (from  2.3 to 34.5 kV ), is called a substation transfonner. Finally, the transformer that  takes the distribution volta
ge and steps it down to the final voltage at which the  power is actually used (110, 208, 220 V, etc.) is called a distribution transformer.  All these devices are essentially the same - the only difference among them is  their intended use.  68  ELECIRIC  MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  (a)  ""GURE 2-3  (a) Shell-form transformer construction. (b) A typical shell-form transformer.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  In addition to the various power transfonners, two special-purpose tran s­ fonner
s are used with e le ctric ma chinery and power system s.  TIl e first  of  these  spec ial  transformers is a device specially designed to sa mpl e a  hi gh voltage and  produce a low secondary voltage directly proportional to it. Such a transfo nn er is  called a  potential transfonner.  A power transformer also produces a secondary  voltage directly proportional to its primary voltage; the difference between a po­ tential transfonner and a power transfo nn er is that the potential transfo rm 
er is de­ signed to handle only a very small current. Th e seco nd  type  of  spec ial  transfo nn er  is a device designed to provide a secondary current  mu ch smaller than but directly  proportional to its primary current. This device is called a  current transformer.  B oth special-purpose transformers are discussed  in  a later section  of  this chapte r.  2.3 THE IDEAL TRANSFORMER  An  ideal transformer  is a lossless device with an input winding and an output  winding. Th e relationships 
between  th e input vo lt age and  th e output voltage, and  betwccn the input curre nt  and the output current, are g iv en by two simple equa­ ti ons.  Fi gure  2- 4  shows an ideal transfo nn e r.  TIle transformer show n  in  Fi gure  2- 4  has  N p  turns  of  wire on its primary  side and  N s  turns of wire on its secondary side.  1ll e relationship betwccn the vo lt -  TRANSFORMER S 69  ip (t) i, (t)  - -• • + +  ( \  N, N, "'p(1) ",,(t)  \ J  ,.,  - - ,b,  H GU R E 2-4  (a) Sketch of an
 ideal transformer. (b) Schematic symbols of a transformer.  age vp(t) applied to the primary side of the transform er and the voltage vsCt) pro­ duced on the secondary side is  ~'p"(t") -!iJ'~-,  vsCt) = Ns = a  where a is defined to be the turns ratio of the transformer:  Np  a~ ­ N,  (2- 1)  (2-2)  llle relationship between the current il...t) flowing into the primary side of the trans­ fonner and the current isCt) flow ing out of the secondary side of the transfonner is  ;"I,IL1  isCt) - a  
(2-3a)  (2-3b)  70 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  In tenns of phasor quantities, these equations are  ,nd  ~ ~  I" ~ 11 I, a  (2- 4)  (2-5)  Notice that the phase angle of Vp is the same as the angle of Vs and the phase an­ gie of Ip is the same as the phase angle of Is. TIle turns ratio of the ideal trans­ fonner affects the magnitudes of the voltages and currents, but not their angles.  Equations (2-1) to (2-5) describe the relationships between the ma gnitudes  and angles of the voltages an
d currents on the primary and secondary sides of the  transformer, but they leave one question unanswered: Given that the primary cir­ cuit's voltage is positive at a specific end of the coil, what would the polarity of  the secondary circuit's voltage be? In real transformers, it wou ld be possible to tell  the secondary's polarity only if the transformer were opened and its windings ex­ amined. To avoid this necessity, transfonners utilize the dot convention. Th e dots  appearing at one end of
 each winding in Figure 2-4 tell the polarity of the voltage  and current on the secondary side of the transformer. TIle relationship is as  follows :  I. If the primary voltage is positive at the dotted end of the winding with respect  to the undotted end, then the secondary voltage will be positive at the dotted  end also. Voltage polarities are the sam e with respect to the dots on each side  of the core.  2. If the primary current of the transform er flows into the dotted end of the pri­ mar
y winding, the secondary current wi ll flow out of the dotted end of the  secondary winding.  TIle physical m eaning of the dot convention and the reason polarities work out  this way wi ll be explained in Section 2.4, which deals with the real transfonner.  Power in an Ideal Transformer  TIle power supplied to the transformer by the primary circuit is given by the  equation  (2-6)  where ()p is the angle between the primary voltage and the primary current. Th e  power supplied by the transforme
r secondary circuit to its loads is given by the  equation  (2-7)  TRANSFORMER S 71  where ()s is the angle between the secondary voltage and the secondary current.  Since voltage and current angles are unaffected by an ideal transfonner, ()p - ()s = ().  T he primary and secondary windings of an ideal transfonner have the same power  factor.  H ow does the power going into the primary circuit of the ideal transformer  compare to the power coming out of the other side? lt is possible to find out
  through a simp le application of the voltage and current equations [Equations (2-4)  and (2-5)]. 1lle power out of a transform er is  P oot = Vsls cos () (2-8)  App lying the turns-ratio equations gives Vs = Vp /a and Is = alp, so  -""  P out - a (alp) cos ()  I P oot - VpIp cos () - P;n (2-9)  T hus, the output power of an ideal transfonner is equal to its input power.  T he sam e relationship applies to reactive power Q and apparent power S:  IQ;" VpIp sin () VsIs sin () Qoo, I (2-10)  and I
s;, ~ Vplp = V sIs = Soot I (2-11 )  Impedan ce Transformation through a Tran sform er  T he impedance of a device or an element is defined as the ratio of the phasor volt­ age across it to the phasor current flow ing through it:  V,  ZL = 1; (2-12)  One of the interesting properties of a transfonner is that, since it changes voltage  and current levels, it changes the ratio between voltage and current and hence the  apparent impedance of an element. To understand this idea, refer to Figure 2-5.
 If  the secondary current is calJed Is and the secondary voltage Vs, then the imped­ ance of the load is given by  V,  ZL = 1;  T he apparent impedance of the primary circuit of the transfonner is  V Z' = --.f.. , Ip  Since the primary voltage can be expressed as  Vp = aVs  (2-13)  (2-14)  72 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  -+  v,  Z, v, z,= - I,  ,,'  -+ +  • •  V,  - ,b,  ""GURE 2--.5  (a) Definition of impedance. (b) Impedance scaling through a transformer.  and the primary current can b
e expressed as  " Ip = -a  the apparent impedance of the primary is  V aV V Z' - ..:...t!. - ~-a2.:...s.  L - Ip - Isla - Is  I Z~ =a2 ZL I  Z,  (2- 15)  With a transfonner, it is possible to match the ma gnitude of a load imped­ ance to a source impedance simply by picking the proper turns ratio.  A nalysis of C ircuits Co ntaining Ideal Transform ers  If a circuit contains an ideal transformer, then the easiest way to analyze the cir­ cuit for its voltages and currents is to replace the portio
n of the circuit on one side  of the transfonner by an equivalent circuit with the sam e tenninal characteristics.  After the equivalent circuit has been substituted for one side, then the new circuit  (without a transformer present) can be solved for its voltages and currents. In the  portion of the circuit that was not replaced, the solutions obtained will be the COf- -,I Ztime  +  V =4S0LO"V  - ,.,  T, I tiDe O.ISo.  1  ,I •  :10 - •  Zlime  +  - V =4S0LO"V  ,b,  FIGURE 2-6  j 0.24 0.  j 0.24
 0.  TRANSFORMER S 73  +  V~~  - T,  10: 1  • •  I'  z~  4+j3o.  1 ~  - Z  + 4+j  ~ - V ~  Th e power system of Example 2- 1 (a) without and (b) with transformers at the ends of the  transmission line.  rect values of voltage and current for the original circuit. 1llen the turns ratio of  the transfonner can be used to detennine the voltages and currents on the other  side of the transfonner. TIle process of replacing one side of a transformer by its  equivalent at the other side's voltage level
 is know n as referring the first side of  the transfonner to the second side.  H ow is the equivalent circuit fonned? Its shape is exactly the same as the  shape of the original circuit. TIle values of voltages on the side being replaced are  scaled by Equation (2-4), and the values of the impedances are scaled by Equa­ tion (2- 15). TIle polarities of voltage sources in the equivalent circuit will be re­ versed from their direction in the original circuit if the dots on one side of the  transf
ormer windings are reversed compared to the dots on the other side of the  transformer windings.  The solution for circuits containing ideal transformers is illustrated in the  follow ing example.  Exa mpl e 2-1. A single-phase power system consists of a 4SO-V 60-H z gen­ erator supplying a load Z_ = 4 + )3 0 through a transmission line of impedance  Ztm. = O.IS + jO.24 O. Answer the following questions about this system.  (a) If the power system is exactly as described above (Figure 2-6a), what
 will the  voltage at the load be? What will the transmission line losses be?  74 ELECIR IC MA C HI NERY FUNDAMENT A LS  (b) Suppose a I: 10 step-up transformer is placed at the generator end of the trans­ mission line and a 10: I step-down transfonner is placed at the load end of the  line (Figure 2-6b). Wh at w ill the load voltage be now? What will the transmis­ sion line losses be now ?  Solutioll  (a) Figure 2-6a shows the powe r system w ithout transfonners. H ere IG = IIu.. =  Ilood' Th e
 line current in this system is given by  IIu.. = ,----'V-,-_ Z Ii". + Z ioad  480 L O° V  = "(O".1"'8'"~+'jio.'!!24'f!i"~) ";+-'("4'"~+'j"3 "'ll)  480 LO° = = 4.18 + j3.24  = 9O .8L-37 .8° A  Th erefore the load voltage is  V 10ad = I line~  480 LO°  5.29L37 .8°  = (90.8 L -37.8° A )(4 n + j3 n )  = (90.8 L -37.8° A )(5 L36 .9° fl)  = 454 L - 0.9° V  and the line losses are  Pim• = (tUDe)' R line  = (90.8 A )' (0.18 n) = 1484 W  (b) Figure 2-6b shows the pow er system w ith the transfonn ers. T
o analyze this sys­ tem , it is necessary to convert it to a comm on voltage level. This is done in two  steps:  I. Eliminate transfonner T2 by referring the load over to the transmission line's  voltage level.  2. Eliminate transformer TI by referring the transmission line's elem ents and  the equivalent load at the transmi ssion line's voltage over to the source side.  Th e value of the load's impedance wh en reflected to the transmission system 's  voltage is  Z · - ,'Z load - load  = (1f)\4n
 + j3n)  = 4000 + j300n  Th e total impedance at the transmission line level is now  Zeq = ~ine + Z io.t  = 400.18 + j300.24 n = 500.3 L36 .88° n  T RA N SFORMER S 75  V =480LO"V 0.18 n jO.24 n  -:10  "  ,  ,  • • ,  ZHDO ,  Z'_= : ,  +  4OO+j300n ,  ,  ,  ,  , ~  ,,' : Equivalent cin:uit  0.0018 fi jO.0024fi  I ,I , "  +  Z'line  ( V =480LO"V Z '_=4+j3fi  - .  Equivalent cin:uit  ,b,  FIGU R E 2-7  (a) System with the load referred to the transmission system voltage level. (b) System with the l
oad  and transmission line referred to the generator's voltage level.  T his equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 2-7a. Th e total impedance at the transmi ssion  line level (4". + Zl~ is now reflected across Tl to the source's voltage level:  Z ' = a2 Z  ~ ~  = a2(l1ine + Z k...i)  = (lb)\0.18 0 + jO.24 0 + 400 0 + j300f.l)  = (0.0018 0 + jO.0024 0 + 4 n + j3 f.!)  = 5.003 L36 .88° n  N otice that Z 'k-d = 4 + j3 0 and:!.time = 0.00 18 + jllOO24 n. Th e resulting equivalent cir­ cuit is show 
n in Figure 2-7b. Th e generator's current is  _ 480LOo V _ °  10 - 5.003 L36 .88° n - 95.94L-36 .88 A  K now ing the current Ie. w e can now wor k back and find II;'" and 1_ . W orking back  through Tl, we get  76 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  = 1~(95.94 L-36.88° A) = 9.594L-36.88° A  Working back through T2 gives  Nn Iline = NSlIload  "n Ilood = N IUDe  n  = \0 (9.594 L-36.880 A) = 95.94L-36.88° A  It is now possible to answer the questions originally asked. The load voltage is given by  V 
10ad = Ibdl10ad  = (95.94 L-36.88° A )(5 L36 .87° 0 )  = 479.7 L-O .Olo V  and the line losses are given by  PIo!;. = (/n ... )lR nne  = (9.594 A )l (0.18 n) = 16.7 W  N otice that raising the transmission voltage of the power system reduced  transmission losses by a factor of nearly 90! Also, the voltage at the load dropped  mu ch less in the system with transformers compared to the system without trans­ fonners. This simple examp le dramatically illustrates the advantages of using  higher-volt
age transmission lines as we ll as the extreme importance of transform­ ers in mod ern power systems.  2.4 THEORY OF OPERATION OF REAL  SINGLE-PHASE TRANSFORMERS  TIle ideal transformers described in Section 2.3 can of course never actually be  mad e. What can be produced are real transformers-two or more coils of wire  physically wrapped around a ferroma gnetic core. Th e characteristics of a real  transformer approximate the characteristics of an ideal transfonner, but only to a  degree. This 
section deals with the behavior of real transformers.  To understand the operation of a real transfonner, refer to Figure 2--8. Fig­ ure 2-8 show s a transfonner consisting of two coils of wire wrapped around a  transfonner core. 1lle primary of the transfonner is connected to an ac power  source, and the secondary winding is open-circuited. TIle hysteresis curve of the  transformer is show n in Figure 2-9.  TRANSFORMER S 77  iP(t)  - +  +  l'  0- N, vP(t)  FIGU R E l-8  Sketch of a real transfo
rmer with no load attached to its secondary.  q, Rux  --------ttt---------M agnetomotive force  FIGU R E 2-9  The hysteresis curve of the transformer.  T he basis oftransfonner operation can be derived from Faraday's law:  dA  e iod = dt (1-41)  where A is the flux linkage in the coil across which the voltage is being induced.  T he flux linkage A is the sum of the flux passing through each turn in the coil  added over all the turns of the coil:  N  A ~ '2:</>; (1-42)  ;= 1  78 ELECIRIC MACHINER
Y FUNDAMENTALS  Th e total flux linkage through a coil is not just N<p, where N is the number of turns  in the coil, because the flux passing through each turn of a coil is slightly differ­ ent from the flux in the other turns, depending on the position of the turn within  the coil.  H owever, it is possible to define an average flux per turn in a coil. If the  total flux linkage in all the turns of the coils is A and if there are N turns, then the  average flux per turn is given by  and Faraday
's law can be written as  - A  q,~ ­ N  - <& eind - N dt  The Voltage Ratio across a Transformer  (2-16)  (2-17)  Ifthe voltage of the source in Figure 2--8 is vp(t), then that voltage is placed di­ rectly across the coils of the primary winding of the transformer. H ow will the  transformer react to this applied voltage? Faraday's law explains what will hap­ pen. Wh en Equation (2- 17) is solved for the average flux present in the primary  winding of the transfonner, the result is  - 1 I <P = N
 Vp(t) dt  p  (2- 18)  TIlis equation states that the average flux in the winding is proportional to the in­ tegral of the voltage applied to the winding, and the constant of proportionality is  the reciprocal of the numb er of turns in the primary winding IINp .  TIlis flux is present in the primary coil of the transformer. What effect does  it have on the secondary coil of the transfonner? TIle effect depends on how mu ch  of the flux reaches the secondary coil. Not all the flux produced in th
e primary  coil also passes through the secondary coil-some of the flux lines leave the iron  core and pass through the air instead (see Figure 2- 10). TIle portion of the flux  that goes through one of the transfonner coils but not the other one is called leak­ age flux. The flux in the primary coil of the transformer can thus be divided into  two compon ents: a mutual flux, which remains in the core and links both wind­ ings, and a small leakage flux, which passes through the primary winding b
ut re­ turns through the air, bypassing the secondary winding:  I <pp = <PM + fu  where <pp = total average primary flux  (2-19)  <PM = flux component linking both primary and secondary coils  <hp = primary leakage flux  TRANSFORMER S 79  -- - -- , -- , - , , , • cPM , , , ~ , ,  '""  , , , , , , I, , , , , , , I,  -0 , , , , 0  -, , +1 , , , , + , , , , \ , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,  I , ; cPLP I I 0.,' I , ,  I I ,  I " I I " S l  I I , , I I I I  I I , ,  i i  I I I I I I , , I I , , , , , , 
 I I , , , ,  \ , , , , , , , , , , , , , •  - -, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,  "  , , , , , , ,  /  '-, , \./1 "  / , , /  -- OM , --,  FIGU RE l-IO  Mutu al and leakage fluxes in a transformer core.  Th ere is a similar division of flux in the secondary winding between mutual flux  and leakage flux which passes through the secondary winding but returns through  the air, bypassing the primary winding:  where  l4>s = 4>M + 4>LS  4>s = total average secondary flux  (2-20)  4>M = flux compone
nt linking both primary and secondary coils  fu = secondary leakage flux  With the division of the average primary flux into mutual and leakage com­ ponents, Faraday's law for the primary circuit can be reexpressed as  (2-21)  Th e first term of this expression can be called ep(l), and the second term can be  called eLP(l). If this is done, then Equation (2-21) can be rewritten as  (2-22)  80 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  TIle voltage on the secondary coil of the transfonner can also be ex
pressed  in term s of Faraday's law as  d<l>s  vs<.t) = NSdt  _ d<l>M dfu  - Ns dt + Ns dt  = esCt) + eL'>(t)  TIle primary voltage due to the mutualflux is given by  _ d4>M ep(t) - Np dt  and the secondary voltage due to the mutualflux is given by  _ d4>M es(t) - N s dt  Notice from these two relationships that  TIlerefore,  ep(t) _ d4>M _ edt)  Np - dt - Ns  (2-23)  (2-24)  (2-25)  (2-26)  (2-27)  TIlis equation mean s that the ratio of the primary voltage caused by the mutual  flux to the sec
ondary voltage caused by the mutualflux is equal to the turns ratio  of the transformer. Since in a well-designed transfonner 4>M » <hp and  4>M » 4>u" the ratio of the total voltage on the primary of a transformer to the to­ tal voltage on the secondary of a transfonner is approximately  vp(t) !i.E.  vs<.t) = N s = a (2-28)  TIle smaller the leakage fluxes of the transfonner are, the closer the total trans­ fonner voltage ratio approximates that of the ideal transfonner discussed in Sec­ tion 2
.3.  Th e M agnetization C urrent in a R eal Tran sform er  Wh en an ac power source is connected to a transform er as show n in Figure 2--8, a  current flows in its primary circuit, even when the secondary circuit is open­ circuited. TIlis current is the current required to produce flux in a real ferromag­ netic core, as explained in Chapter I. It consists of two components:  TRANSFORMER S 81  I. The magnetization current iM , which is the current required to produce the  flux in the transforme
r core  2. llle core-loss current iH " which is the current required to make up for hys­ teresis and eddy current losses  Figure 2-11 show s the ma gnetization curve of a typical transformer core. If  the fl ux in the transformer core is known , then the ma gnitude of the ma gnetization  current can be found directly from Figure 2-11.  Ignoring for the m oment the effects of leakage flux, w e see that the average  flux in the core is given by  - 1 f cf> = Np vp(t)dt (2-18)  If the primary voltag
e is given by the expression vp(t) = VM cos wt V, then the re­ sulting flux mu st be  cf> = ~ f VM cos wtdt  p  VM .  ~ --smwt Wb wN p  (2-29)  If the values of current required to produce a given flux (Figure 2-11 a) are com­ pared to the flux in the core at different times, it is possible to construct a sketch  of the ma gnetization current in the winding on the core. Such a sketch is shown in  Figure 2-11 b. Notice the following points about the ma gnetization current:  I. The ma gnetization 
current in the transfonner is not sinusoidal. Th e higher­ frequency components in the ma gnetization current are due to ma gnetic sat­ uration in the transfonner core.  2. On ce the peak flux reaches the saturation point in the core, a small increase  in peak flux requires a very large increase in the peak ma gnetization current.  3. Th e fundamental component of the ma gnetization current lags the voltage ap­ plied to the core by 90°.  4. llle higher-frequency comp onents in the ma gnetization
 current can be quite  large compa red to the fundamental component. In general, the further a trans­ fonner core is driven into saturation, the larger the hannonic comp onents wil I  becom e.  Th e other comp onent of the no-load current in the transformer is the current  required to supply power to make up the hysteresis and eddy current losses in the  core. lllis is the core-loss current. Assum e that the flux in the core is sinusoidal.  Since the eddy currents in the core are proportional to
 d<PIdt, the eddy currents are  largest wh en the flux in the core is passing through 0 Wb. lllerefore, the core-loss  current is greatest as the flux passes through zero. The total current required to  make up for core losses is shown in Figure 2-12.  ,.Wb  --------,/----------~,A · turns  (a)  " ---7'C---------------------t---~ , , , , , , " , " , , , , , ,  ~~' c--\--_r'--'"--",C_-'--- , , , , , , ,  " , " , " , , ,  ------~I---+---- ~,  '. ... ./ '-'---------', ------------c:01'  v. ifi(l) '
" - N sin WI w,  (bj  -------t----"'--+-----'m  ,  H GU R E 2-11  (a) The magnetization curve of the transformer core. (b) The magnetization current caused by the  flux in the transformer core.  82  FIGURE 2-12  Th e core-loss current in a transformer.  f\  1;\  FIGURE 2-13  f\  -,  " , , , , , , , , ,  v  , , , , ,  Th e total excitation current in a transformer.  , , '- , , , ,  v  TRANSFORMER S 83  N otice the following points about. the core-loss current:  I. Th e core-loss current is nonlin
ear because of the nonline.1.r effects of hysteresis.  2. 1lle fundamental comp onent of the core-loss current is in phase with the volt­ age applied to the core.  Th e total no-load current in the core is called the excitation current of the  transfonner. It is just the sum of the ma gnetization current and the core-loss cur­ rent in the core:  (2-30)  Th e total excitation current in a typical transfonner core is shown in Figure 2-13.  84 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  I,  - •  +  V , N, 
 ""GURE 2-14  A real transformer with a load connected to its secondary.  Th e Current R atio on a Transform er and the  D ot Co nvention  I,  • - +  V,  N,  '"'''  Now suppose that a load is connected to the secondary of the transformer. T he re­ sulting circuit is show n in Figure 2- 14. Notice the dots on the windings of the  transformer. As in the ideal transfonner previously described, the dots help deter­ mine the polarity of the voltages and currents in the core without having physi­ call
y to examine its windings. T he physical significance of the dot convention is  that a current flowing into the doffed end of a winding produces a positive mng­ netomotive force '?J', while a current flow ing into the undotted end of a winding  produces a negative rnagnetomotive force. T herefore, two currents flow ing into  the dotted ends of their respective windings produce rnagnetom otive forces that  add. If one current flows into a dotted end of a winding and one flows out ofa dot­ ted end
, then the ma gnetornotive forces will subtract from each other.  In the situation show n in Figure 2- 14, the primary current produces a posi­ tive ma gnetornotive force '?J'p = Np ip, and the secondary current produces a neg­ ative rnagnetomotive force:lis = -Nsis. Therefore, the net rnagnetomotive force  on the core rnust be  (2-31)  lllis net ma gnetornotive force mu st produce the net flux in the core, so the net  ma gnetornotive force mu st be equal to  (2-32)  TRANSFORMER S 85  ;.Wb  ----
---I--------~.A .turns  FIGUR E 2-15  Th e magnetization curve of an ideal  transformer.  where m is the reluctance of the transfonner core. Because the reluctance of a well­ designed transfonner core is very small (nearly zero) until the core is saturated, the  relationship between the primary and secondary currents is approximately  2i'Det = Npip - Nsis "'" 0  as long as the core is unsaturated. TIlerefore,  I Npip "'" Nsis I  (2-33)  (2-34)  (2-35)  It is the fact that the ma gnetomotive forc
e in the core is nearly zero which gives  the dot convention the meaning in Section 2.3. In order for the ma gnetom otive  force to be nearly zero, current mu st flow into one dotted end and out of the other  dotted end. The voltages mu st be built up in the sam e way with respect to the dots  on each winding in order to drive the currents in the direction required. (TIle po­ larity of the voltages can also be determined by Lenz' law if the construction of  the transfonner coils is visible.)  Wh
at assumptions are required to convert a real transformer into the ideal  transfonner described previously? 1lley are as follows:  I. 1lle core mu st have no hysteresis or eddy currents.  2. 1lle ma gnetization curve mu st have the shape show n in Figure 2- 15. Notice  that for an unsaturated core the net ma gnetom otive force 2i'nel = 0, implying  that Npip = Nsis.  3. The leakage flux in the core mu st be zero, implying that all the flux in the  core couples both windings.  4. 1lle resistance 
of the transfonner windings mu st be zero.  86 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  While these conditions are never exactly m et, well-designed power transformers  can com e quite close.  2.5 THE EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT OF  A TRANSFORMER  TIle losses that occur in real transformers have to be accounted for in any accurate  mod el oftransforrner behavior. The major item s to be considered in the construc­ tion of such a mod el are  I. Copper cPR) losses. Copper losses are the resistive heating losses in 
the pri­ mary and secondary windings of the transformer. They are proportional to the  square of the current in the windings.  2. Eddy current losses. Edd y current losses are resistive heating losses in the  core of the transformer. Th ey are proportional to the square of the voltage ap­ plied to the transformer.  3. H ysteresis losses. H ysteresis losses are associated with the rearrangem ent of  the ma gnetic domains in the core during each half-cycle, as explained in  Chapter 1. Th ey are a 
complex, nonlinear function of the voltage applied to  the transform er.  4. Leakagef1ux. TIle fluxes <PLP and 4>u. which escape the core and pass through  only one of the transformer windings are leakage fluxes. Th ese escaped  fluxes produce a self-inductance in the primary and secondary coils, and the  effects of this inductance mu st be accounted for.  The Exact Equivalent Circuit of a  Real Transformer  lt is possible to construct an equivalent circuit that takes into account all the ma­ jo
r imperfections in real transformers. E:1.ch major imperfection is considered in  turn, and its effect is included in the transformer mod el.  TIle easiest effect to mod el is the copper losses. Copper losses are resistive  losses in the primary and secondary windings of the transformer core. They are  mod eled by placing a resistor Rp in the primary circuit of the transformer and a re­ sistor Rs in the secondary circuit.  As explained in Section 2.4, the leakage flux in the primary windings <PL
P  produces a voltage <PLP given by  (2-36a)  and the leakage flux in the secondary windings 4>u. produces a voltage eLS given by  (2-36b)  TRANSFORMER S 87  Since mu ch of the leakage flux path is through air, and since air has a constant re­ luctance mu ch higher than the core reluctance, the flux fu is directly proportional  to the primary circuit current ip and the flux <hs is directly proportional to the sec­ ondary current is:  q,LP = (IlPNp) i p  q,LS = (IlPNs)is  where IlP = penneance of
 fl ux path  Np = numb er of turns on primary coil  Ns = numb er of turns on secondary coil  Substitute Equations (2-37) into Equations (2-36). TIle result is  eLP(t) = Np :r (raW p)i p = NJ, IlP ~{  d . dis  eLS (!) = Ns d/!PNs)IS = ~ rJ> dt  Th e constants in these equations can be lumped together. Then  _ dip  eLP(t) - Lp dt  (2-37a)  (2-37b)  (2-38a)  (2-38b)  (2-39a)  (2-39b)  where Lp = N}1lP is the self-inductance of the primary coil and Ls = NIIlP is the  self-inductance of the secondary
 coil. Therefore, the leakage flux will be mod eled  by primary and secondary inductors.  H ow can the core excitation effects be m odeled? TIle ma gnetization current  im is a current proportional (in the unsaturated region) to the voltage applied to the  core and lagging the applied voltage by 900, so it can be modeled by a reactance  X M connected across the primary voltage source. TIle core-loss current iH< is a  current proportional to the voltage applied to the core that is in phase with t
he ap­ plied voltage, so it can be mod eled by a resistance Re connected across the pri­ mary voltage source. (Rem ember that both these currents are really nonlinear, so  the inductance X M and the resistance R e are, at best, approximations of the real ex­ citation effects.)  The resulting equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2- 16. N otice that the ele­ IllCnts forming the excitation branch are placed inside the primary resistance Rp and  the primary inductance Lp. lllis is because the volta
ge actually applied to the core  is really equal to the input voltage less the internal voltage drops of the winding.  Although Figure 2- 16 is an accurate mod el ofa transfonner, it is not a very  useful one. To analyze practical circuits containing transformers, it is normally  necessary to convert the entire circuit to an equivalent circuit at a single voltage  level. (Such a conversion was done in E xample 2- 1.) Th erefore, the equivalent  88 ELECIRI C MA C HIN ERY FUNDAMENT ALS  I,  -+  v,
 ~  R,~  - ""GURE 2-16  The model of a real transformer.  I,  R, jXp  +  V, R, ~  R, . X,  " I, ? J ?  -+  R, ~ ?  - ""GURE 2-17  [  • •  JX. N, N,  d'R,  [ "  jXM  j  ,.,  R,  I  .X.  Je>  "  [  ,b,  Ideal  transformer  ja2 X,  JX,  *  I,  - jX s  I,  - +  aV ,  +  V ,  (a) The transformer model referred to its primary vo ltage level. (b) The transfonner model referred  to its secondary voltage level.  +  v,  - circuit mu st be referred either to its primary side or to its secondary side in  pr
oblem solutions. Figure 2-17a is the equivalent circuit of the transfonner re­ ferred to its primary side, and Figure 2-17b is the equivalent circuit referred to its  secondary side.  TRANSFORMER S 89  A pproximate Equivalent C ircuits of a Transform er  T he transfonner models shown before are often m ore complex than necessary in  order to get good results in practical engineering applications. One of the princi­ pal complaints about them is that the excitation branch of the mod el adds anothe
r  node to the circuit being analyzed, making the circuit solution more complex than  necessary. T he excitation branch has a very small current compared to the load  current of the transfonners. In fact, it is so small that under nonnal circum stances  it causes a completely negligible voltage drop in Rp and Xp. Because this is true, a  simplified equivalent circuit can be produced that work s almost as well as the  original m odel. T he excitation branch is simply m oved to the front of the tr
ans­ fonner, and the primary and secondary impedan ces are left in series with each  other. TIlese impedances are just added, creating the approximate equivalent cir­ cuits in Figure 2- 18a and b.  In som e applications, the excitation branch may be neglected entirely with­ out causing serious error. In these cases, the equivalent circuit of the transformer  reduces to the simple circuits in Figure 2- 18c and d.  I, I,  " ,I, I,  - )X"lP  - - jXeq.  -+  j  v, < R,  J - ,,'  I,  - R.~  v,  jXM  +
  aV ,  Reqp '" Rp + rrR,  xeqp '" xp + rrx,  .. , - jXeqp  - - ,~---------~,- ,,'  FIGURE 2-18  +  V , ,  - ,b,  V , ,  ,I, - :  j  R, .x.  if )-;;>  J  I,  - V ,  - ,~---------~,- ,d,  Approximate transformer models. (a) Referred to the primary side; (b) referred to the secondary  side; (c) with no excitation branch. referred to the primary side; (d) with no excitation branch.  referred to the secondary side.  +  V ,  - 90 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  r:0  at me er ip (t)  -\J + • •  w,
  + v (t)  ""'  V vp (t) - - Transformer  -0-Ammeter  --0-Voltmeter  ""GU R E 2-19  Connection for transformer open-cirwit test.  D etennining the Va lues of Co mp onents in the  Transform er M odel  It is possible to experimentally detennine the values of the inductances and resis­ tances in the transfonner m odel. An adequate approximation of these values can  be obtained with only two tests, the open-circuit test and the short-circuit test.  In the open-circuit test, a transfonner's secondary
 winding is open­ circuited, and its primary winding is connected to a full-rated line voltage. Look  at the equivalent circuit in Figure 2- 17. Und er the conditions described, all the in­ put current mu st be flowing through the excitation branch of the transfonner. T he  series elements Rp and Xp are too small in comparison to R cand XM to cause a sig­ nificant voltage drop, so essentially all the input voltage is dropped across the ex­ citation branch.  TIle open-circuit test connections are
 show n in Figure 2- 19. Full line volt­ age is applied to the primary of the transfonner, and the input voltage, input cur­ rent, and input power to the transfonner are mea sured. From this information, it is  possible to detennine the power factor of the input current and therefore both the  mngnitude and the angle of the excitation impedance.  TIle easiest way to calculate the values of Rc and XM is to look first at the  admittance of the excitation branch. TIle conductance of the core-loss r
esistor is  given by  1 GC=R c  and the susceptance of the ma gnetizing inductor is given by  1 BM = -XM  (2-40)  (2-41)  Since these two elements are in parallel, their admittances add, and the total exci­ tation admittance is  r:0  a meter ip (t)  -\J + • •  w"  + v (t)  '"  V vp (t) - - T ransformer  FIGU RE 2-10  Connection for transformer shon-circuit test.  YE = G c - JBM  ~ _I _j_'  Rc XM  TRANSFORMER S 91  i, (t)  - (2-42)  (2-43)  Th e magnitude of the excitation admittance (referred to
 the primary circuit)  can be found from the open-circuit test voltage and current:  IYE I ~ ~oe  DC  (2-44)  Th e angle of the admittance can be found from a know ledge of the circuit power  factor. 1lle open-circuit power factor (PF ) is given by  and the power-factor angle () is given by  Poe () = cos-1 ,,-'7~  YclC10c  (2-45)  (2-46)  Th e power factor is always lagging for a real transfonner, so the angle of the current  always lags the angle of the voltage by () degrees. 1llCrefore, the ad
mittance YE is  I  YE = VOC L-()  oe  loe ~ --L-cos-1 PF  Voe (2-47)  B y comparing Equations (2-43) and (2-47), it is possible to determine the values  of Rc and XM directly from the open-circuit test data.  In the shott-circuit test, the secondary tenninals of the transformer are short­ circuited, and the primary tenninals are connected to a fairly low-vo ltage source, as  shown in Figure 2-20. Th e input voltage is adjusted until the current in the short­ circuited windings is equal to its ra
ted value. (Be sure to keep the primary voltage  at a saJe level. It wou ld not be a good idea to burn out the transformer's windings  while trying to test it.) 1lle input voltage, current, and power are again m easured.  92 ELECIRIC MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  Since the input voltage is so low during the short-circuit test, negligible cur­ rent flows through the excitation branch. If the excitation current is ignored, then  all the voltage drop in the transformer can be attributed to the series ele
ments in  the circuit. Th e mag nitude of the series impedances referred to the primary side of  the transformer is  TIle power factor of the current is given by  P,c PF = cos (J = u-''i­VscIsc  (2-48)  (2-49)  and is lagging. Th e current angle is thus negative, and the overall impedance an­ gle (J is positive:  (2-50)  TIlerefore,  VscLO ° = Vsc L (J0  Z SE = lsc L (J0 lsc (2-51)  TIle series impedance ZSE is equal to  ZSE = Req + jXeq  = (Rp + a2RS) + j(Xp + a2Xs) (2-52)  It is possible to de
tennine the total series impedance referred to the primary  side by using this technique, but there is no easy way to split the series impedance  into primary and secondary component s. Fortunately, such separation is not nec­ essary to solve nonnal problem s.  TIlese sam e tests may also be perfonned on the secondary side of the trans­ fonner if it is m ore convenient to do so because of voltage levels or other reasons.  If the tests are performed on the secondary side, the results will natural
ly yield the  equivalent circuit impedances referred to the secondary side of the transfonner in­ stead of to the primary side.  EXllmple 2-2. The equivalent circuit impedances of a 20-kVA, 800CV240-V, 6O-H z  transformer are to be determined. The open-circuit test and the short-circuit test were  perfonned on the primary side of the transfonner, and the following data were taken:  Open-circuit tcst  (on prinmry)  Voc = 8000 V  loc = O.214A  Voc = 400W  Short-circuit tcst  (on prinmry)  Vsc = 48
9V  Isc = 2.5 A  P sc = 240 W  TRAN SFORMER S 93  Find the impedances of the approximate equivalent circuit referred to the primary side, and  sketch that circuit.  Solution  Th e power factor during the open,circuit test is  Poc PF = cos (J = oi-~­Vocloc  400 W  = cos (J = (8000 V )(0.2 14 A )  = 0.234 lagg ing  Th e excitation admittance is given by  = 0.2 14 A L- -, 0 23' 8(x)() V cos .  = 0.cX)OO268 L -76.5° n  = 0.0000063 - jO.OOOO 261 = i -j i  C M  Th erefore,  1 R c = 0.0000Cl63 = 159 kO
  1  XM = 0 .000026 1 = 38.4 k!l  Th e power factor during the short-circuit test is  P", PF = cos (J = oi--~ Vsclsc  = cos (J = (4 89~~(~5 A ) = 0.196 lagging  Th e series impedance is given by  V  ZsE = .....K L -cos-l PF I",  = i~; X L78 .7°  = 195.6L78 .7° = 38.4 + jl92 0  Th erefore, the equivalent resistance and reactance are  R eq = 38.4 0 X eq= 192 0  Th e resulting simplified equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2-2 1.  (2-45)  (2-47)  (2-49)  94 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  jXe
q  - -+  I ;8.40  +  j1920  ' ... I I"  v ~ R, jX .. , j38.4 kD. 159kD.  ,v,  \ I - ""GURE 2-21  The equivalent cin:uit of Exampl e 2-2.  2.6 T H E PE R-U NIT SYSTE M O F M EASU R E M E NT S  As the relatively simple Example 2- 1 showed, solving circuits containing trans­ fonners can be quite a tedious operation because of the need 10 refer all the dif­ ferent voltage levels on differenl sides of the transfonners in the system to a com­ mon level. Only after this step has been taken can the syst
em be solved for its  voltages and currents.  TIlere is another approach 10 solving circuits containing transfonners which  eliminates the need for explicit voltage-level conversions at every transform er in  the system. Instead, the required conversions are handled automatically by the  m ethod itself, without ever requiring the user to worry about impedance transfor­ mations. Because such impedance transfonnations can be avoided, circuits con­ taining many transfonners can be solved easily wit
h less chance of error. This  m ethod of calculation is know n as the per-unit (pu) system of mea surements.  There is yet another advantage to the per-unit system that is quite significant  for electric ma chinery and transfonners. As the size of a machine or transfonner  varies, its internal impedances vary widely. Thu s, a primary circuit reactance of  O. I n might be an atrociously high number for one transfonner and a ridiculously  low number for another- it all depends on the device's volt
age and power ratings.  H oweve r, it turns out that in a per-unit system related to the device's ratings, ma­ chine and transformer impednnces fall within fairly nanvw ranges for each type and  construction of device. This fact can serve as a usefu I check in problem solutions.  In the per-unit system , the voltages, currents, powers, impedances, and other  electrical quantities are not mea sured in their usual SI units (volts, amperes, watts,  ohms, etc.). Instead, each electrical quantity is 
measured as a decimal fraction of  some base level. Any quantity can be expressed on a per-unit basis by the equation  Quantit r unit = Actual value. y pe base value of quantity (2-53)  where "actual value" is a value in volts, amperes, ohm s, etc.  TRANSFORMER S 95  It is customary to select two base quantities to define a given per-unit sys­ tem. The ones usually selected are voltage and power (or apparent power). Once  these base quantities have been selected, all the other base values are re
lated to  them by the usual electrical laws. In a single-phase system , these relationships are  (2-54)  (2-55)  (2-56)  and (2-57)  On ce the base values of S (or P ) and V have been selected, all other base values  can be computed easily from Equations (2-54) to (2-57).  In a power system, a base apparent power and voltage are selected at a spe­ cific point in the system. A transfonner has no effect on the base apparent power  of the system, since the apparent power into a transfonner equals t
he apparent  power out of the transfonner [Equation (2-11)]. On the other hand, voltage  changes wh en it goes through a transformer, so the value of VI>a .. changes at every  transformer in the system according to its turns ratio. Because the base quantities  change in passing through a transfonner, the process of referring quantities to a  comm on voltage level is automatically taken care of during per-unit conversion.  EXllmple 2-3. A simple power system is shown in Figure 2-22. This system c
on­ tains a 480-V generator connected to an ideal I: 10 step-up transfonner, a transmission line,  an ideal 20: I step-down transformer, and a load. The impedance of the transmission line is  20 + j60 n, and the impedance of the load is IOL30o n. The base values for this system are  chosen to be 480 V and 10 kVA at the generator.  (a) Find the base voltage, current, impedan ce, and apparent power at every point in  the power system.  (b) Convert this system to its per-unit equivalent circuit.  (
c) Find the pow er supplied to the load in this system.  (d) Find the pow er lost in the transmi ssion line.  Y G 480LOo y  '-''-'  R egion I R egIOn 2  FIGURE 2-22  The power system of Example 2-3.  R egIOn 3  96 ELECIR IC MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS  Solutio"  (a) In the generator region. Vbo .. = 480 V and 5_ = 10 kVA, so  s~. lbase I = -~-- =  ~,  10,000 VA = 2083A 480 V .  Vbase I 480 V II  z."... I = lba .. I = 20.83 A = 23.04  The turns ratio oftransfonner Tl is a = 1110 = 0.1, so the base v
oltage in the  transmission line region is  v. = Vbase1 = 480V = 4800 V  bo. •• 2 a 0.1  The other base quantities are  Sbasel = 10 kVA  k m~ = 10,000 VA = 2083A  .,....~ 4800 V .  4800 V  Z basel = 2.083 A = 2304 n  The turns ratio of transfonner Tl is a = 2011 = 20, so the base voltage in the  load region is  _ ~ = 4800 V = 240 V Vbase ) - a 20  The other base quantities are  5110..,)= IOkVA  lbo.se) = lOi~\; A = 41.67 A  240 V  Z~ 1 = 41.67 A = 5.76 n  (b) To convert a power system to a per-l
Ulit system, each component must be di­ vided by its base value in its region of the system. The generator s per-lUlit volt­ age is its actual value divided by its base value:  _ 480LOoV _ °  Vo."" - 480V - 1.0LO pu  The transmission line s per-unit impedance is its actual value divided by its base  value:  20+j60n .  ~iDe."" = 2304 n = 0.0087 + )0.0260 pu  The loads per-lUlit impedance is also given by actual value divided by base value:  The per-unit equivalent circuit of the power system is s
hown in Figure 2-23.  TRAN SFORMER S 97  , ~ IHme 0.0087 pu jO.0260 pu I , ~  - - I - 1  I  I  I  + I  "G ",lLOO ~ '" 1.736 L 30° per unit - I  IG. I""' '" llino• "" '" IJo.d. I""' '" I""  Jo'IGURE 2-23  The per-unit equivalent circuit for Examp le 2-3.  (c) The current flowing in this per-unit power system is  V  I = ~  I""' z..".""  I LO°  = "CO'".OOmoS'7 "+C-J"'·OO.O"26fiO;C) ';+CCC"".7'36'L7i030WO")  I  I  I  I  1 LO°  = "CO,".OOmoS'7 ~+-J"'·OO.O~26f,O~) ~+~C"'<.5"m,"+'j"O."S6as")  1.512 + j
O.894 1.757 L30 .6°  = 0.569 L -30.6° pu  Therefore, the per-unit power of the load is  p load.1""' = PI""'Rpu = (0.569)2(1.503) = 0.487  and the actual power supplied to the load is  PIo.! = flo.l.I""'Sbo>e = (0.487)(10,000 VA)  = 4870W  (d) The per-unit power lost in the transmission line is  p u .... 1""' = PI""'R 1ine.pu = (0.569)2(0'(XJ87) = 0'(xl282  and the actual power lost in the transmission line is  fline = fli .... ""St-. = (0.00282)(10,000 VA)  = 28.2 W  When only one device (transf
onner or m otor) is being analyzed, its ow n rat­ ings are usually used as the base for the per-unit system. If a per-unit system based  on the transfonner's own ratings is used, a powe r or distribution transform er's  characteristics will not vary mu ch over a wide range of voltage and power ratings.  For examp le, the series resistance of a transfonner is usually about 0.01 per unit,  98  ELECIRIC  MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS  ..  2 1'  ,.J  (a)  ,b,  ""GURE 2-14  (a)  A  typical  13.2---kY  to 12
01240-Y distribution transformer.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric  Company.)  (b) A cutaway view  of  the distribution transformer showing the shell-form transfonner  inside  it.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  and the se ri es  reactance is usually between 0.02 and 0.10 per unit.  In  general,  th e  larger the transformer, the smaller the series impedan ces.  1ll e ma gnetizing reac­ tance is usually between about 10 and 40 per unit, while the core-loss resistan ce  is  usually betwee
n about 50 and 200 per unit. Be ca use per-unit va lu es  provide a co n­ venient and meanin gf ul  way to  co mpare transformer characteris ti cs when they are  of  different sizes, transformer impedan ces  are normally given  in  per-unit or as a  percentage on the transformer 's  nam eplate (see  Fi gure  2- 46,  later  in  this chapter).  1lle  sam e  id ea  app li es to synchronous and induc ti on ma chin es  as we ll:  Th eir  per-unit impedances  fall  within relatively narrow ranges over
 quite large size ranges.  If  m ore than one ma chine and one transformer are includ ed  in  a s in g le  power syste m,  the system base voltage and power may  be  chosen arbitrarily,  but  the  entire system must  ha ve  the same base.  On e  co mm on procedure is to choose  th e system base quantities to be equal to the base of the largest  co mpon e nt  in  the  system. Per-unit va lu es  given to another base  ca n  be  co nve rt ed  to  th e new base by  co nverting them to their actual v
a lu es  (volts, amperes, ohm s, etc.)  as  an in­ between step. Alternativel y,  they  ca n be  co nve rt ed  directly by the equations   TRANSFORMER S 99  Ip,po R., jXoq I" po  - -+  j  +  , 0.012 fJ·06  I ~H 1 I'm  V R, JXm V "po ,,~  49.7 jl2  FIGU R E 2-15  Th e per-unit equivalent circuit of Ex ample 2-4.  Sb a.se t  (P, Q, S)poon base 2 = (P, Q, S)poon base ]-S-­ "=,  v.: v.: V base ] P" on base 2 = po on base ] V base2  (R , X , Z)P" 00 base 2 =  (Vbase t?(Sba se 2)  (R , X, Z)pu on base
 t(l< )'(S ) base 2 base ]  (2-58)  (2-59)  (2-60)  Exa mpl e 2-4. Sketch the approximate per-unit equivalent circuit for the trans­ fonner in Example 2-2. Use the transformer's ratings as the system base.  Solutioll  The transfonner in Example 2-2 is rated at 20 kVA, 8()(x)/240 V. The approximate equiva­ lent circuit (Figure 2-21) developed in the example was referred to the high-voltage side of  the transfonner, so to convert it to per-unit, the primary circuit base impedance mu st be  fOlUld.
 On the primary,  Therefore,  V!>Me I = 80CXl V  Sbo>e I = 20,(XXl VA  (Vb ... t)l (8()(x) V )2  z.... •• t= S = 20 00Cl VA =3200 0  ~, '  _ 38.4 + jl92 0 _ .  ZsE,po - 3200 0 - 0.012 + jO.06 pu  159 ill Rc.pu = 3200 0 = 49.7 pu  38.4 kO ZM.pu = 3200 0 = 12 pu  T he per-unit approximate equivalent circuit, expressed to the transfonner's own base, is  shown in Figure 2-25.  100 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  2.7 TRANSFORMER VOLTAGE  REGULATION AND EFFICIENCY  B ecause a real transformer has ser
ies impedances within it, the output voltage of  a transfonner varies with the load even if the input voltage remains constant. To  conveniently compare transfonne rs in this respect, it is customary to define a  quantity called voltage regulation (VR ). F ull-load voltage regulation is a quantity  that compares the output voltage of the transformer at no load with the output  voltage at full load. lt is defined by the equation  I VR = V S.nlV: n  V S. fl  x 100% I (2-61)  Since at no load, Vs =
 Vp /a, the voltage regulation can also be expressed as  (2-62)  I f the transformer equivalent circuit is in the per-unit system, then voltage regula­ tion can be expressed as  VR =  ~ - ~ p.P" S.fl.p"  ~ X  S.fl.pu  100% (2-63)  U sually it is a good practice to have as small a voltage regulation as possible.  For an ideal transfonner, VR = 0 percent. lt is not always a good idea to have a  low-vo ltage regulation, though-som etimes high-impedance and high-voltage reg­ ulation transfonners are
 deliberately used to reduce the fault currents in a circuit.  H ow can the voltage regulation of a transfonner be detennined?  The Transformer Pha sor Diagram  To detennine the voltage regu lation of a transfonner, it is necessary to understand  the voltage drops within it. Consider the simplified transfonner equivalent circuit  in Figure 2-1 Sb. TIle effects of the excitation branch on transformer voltage reg­ ulation can be ignored, so only the series impedances need be considered. Th e  volt
age regulation of a transfonner depends both on the ma gnitude of these series  impedances and on the phase angle of the current flow ing through the transform er.  TIle easiest way to detennine the effect of the impedances and the current phase  angles on the transform er voltage regulation is to examine a pha sor diagram, a  sketch of the phasor voltages and currents in the transformer.  In all the following phasor diagrams, the phasor voltage V s is assumed to be  at an angle of 0°, and all o
ther voltages and currents are comp ared to that refer­ ence. By applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to the equivalent circuit in Figure  2-ISb, the primary voltage can be found as  TRANSFORMERS 101  (2-64)  A transfonner phasor diagram is just a visual representation of this equation.  Figure 2-26 shows a phasor diagram of a transformer operating at a lagging  power factor. It is easy to see that Vp la > ~ for lagging loads, so the voltage reg­ ulation of a transformer with lagging loads mu st be 
greater than zero.  A phasor diagram at unity power factor is show n in Figure 2-27a. H ere again,  the voltage at the secondary is lower than the voltage at the primary, so VR > O.  H oweve r, this time the voltage regulation is a smaller number than it was with a lag­ ging current. If the secondary current is leading, the secondary voltage can actually  be higher than the referred primary voltage. If this happens, the transformer actually  has a negative voltage regulation (see Figure 2-27b). 
 FIGU R E 2-26  Phasor diagram of a traruformer operating at a lagging power factor.  (a)  I,  ,b,  FIGU R E 2-27  v, ,  v ,  v , ,  Phasor diagram of a transformer operating at (a) unity and (b) teading power factor.  102 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  , v,  I,  ,  v  -" I ,  I  jX"jI, I  I  -----t-- Vp ... V,+R oq l,cos0 +Xoql.Si~O I  "  ""GURE 2-28  Derivation of the approximate equation for Vpla.  Transform er Efficiency  Transformers are also compared and judged on their efficiencies. T
he efficiency  of a device is defined by the equation  P out  " ~ - X 100% flo  P out  1/ = x 100%  ~ut+ ~oss  (2-65)  (2-66)  TIlese equations apply to motors and generators as well as to transfonners.  TIle transformer equivalent circuits mak e efficiency calculations easy. There  are three types of losses present in transfonners:  I. Copper (PR) losses. The se losses are accounted for by the series resistance in  the equivalent circuit.  2. H ysteresis losses. The se losses were explained in 
Chapter I and are ac­ counted for by resistor Re.  3. Eddy current losses. lllese losses were explained in Chapter I and are ac­ counted for by resistor Re.  To calculate the efficiency of a transfonner at a given load, just add the losses  from each resistor and apply Equation (2-67). Since the output power is given by  (2-7)  the efficiency of the transfonner can be expressed by  (2-67)  TRANSFORMERS 103  Exa mpl e 2-5. A 15-kVA, 23001230-V transformer is to be tested to detennine its  excitat
ion branch components, its series impedances, and its voltage regulation. T he fol­ lowing test data have been taken from the primary side of the transformer:  Ope n-ciITuit tcsl  Voc = 2300 V  loc = 0.21 A  Poc = SOW  Short-circuillesl  Vsc = 47V  Isc = 6.0A  Psc = I60W  The data have been taken by using the connections shown in Figures 2- 19 and 2-20.  (a) Find the equivalent circuit of this transformer referred to the high-voltage side.  (b) Find the equivalent circuit of this transformer ref
erred to the low-voltage side.  (c) Calculate the full-load voltage regulation at O.S lagging power factor, 1.0 power  factor, and at O.Sleading power factor.  (d) Plot the voltage regulation as load is increased from no load to full load at power  factors of O.S lagging, 1.0, and O.S leading.  (e) What is the efficiency of the transformer at full load with a power factor of O.S  lagging?  Solutioll  (a) The excitation branch values of the transformer equivalent circuit can be calcu­ lated from 
the open-circuit test data, and the series elements can be calculated  from the short-circuit test data. From the open-circuit test data, the open-circuit  impedance angle is  _ - t Poe  60c - cos Voc:ioc  _ - t SOW _ 84"  - cos (2300 VXO.21 A) - The excitation admittance is thus  = 0.21 A L -S40  2300 V  = 9.13 x 1O -~ L-84°0 = 0.0000095 - jO.OOOO9OS0  The elements of the excitation branch referred to the primary are  1 R c = 0.0000095 = 105 kO  1 XM = O.()()(X)9()S = II kf!  From the short-cir
cuit test data, the short-circuit impedance angle is  104 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  V ,  "  , - I Psc sc=cos V. J sc sc  _ - I l60 W _ 554" - cos (47 V )(6 A ) - .  Th e equivalent series impedance is thus  V" ZsE = -[- L 'oc  "  = ~: L55.4° n  = 7.833L55.4° = 4.45 + j6.45  Th e series elem ents referred to the primary are  Xeq = 6.45 n  This equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 2-29a.  (b) To find the equivalent circuit referred to the low-vo ltage side, it is simply neces­ sary 
to divide the impedance by il. Since a = NpiNs = 10, the resulting values are  "  R.., jX oq I,  " , - " -+ +  I 4.450 j6.45 0  IhH  j j'm  V Rc ~ jXm aV , PJ05 k fl +jll k fl  I  ,,'  "', R"" jX oq, , ,  - -+  j  +  0.04450 .fl.0645 fl  al ~ + ~  I "'m  ~= J0500 V ,  ~=jIJOO  " I ,b,  fo'IGURE 2-29  Th e lransfer equivatent circuit for Ex ample 2-5 referred 10 (a) its primary side and (b) its secondary  side.  TRAN SFORMERS 105  Rc = 1050 n  XM = lIOn  R oq = 0.0445 n  X oq = 0.0645 n  Th e res
ulting equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 2-29b.  (c) Th e full-load current on the secondary side of this transfonner is  _ ~ _ 15,OCXl VA _  IS,med - V. - 230 V - 65.2 A  S,med  To calculate Vpla, use Equ ation (2-64):  V, .  a = Vs + Roq Is + JX oq Is  At PF = 0.8 lagging, current Is = 65.2 L -36.9° A. Th erefore,  (2-64)  ~ = 230L O° V + (0.0445 fl)(65.2L-3 6.9° A ) + j(0.0645 O X65.2L -36.9° A )  = 230 LO° V + 2.90L -36.9° V + 4.2 1 L53 .10 V  = 230 + 2.32 - jl.74 + 2.52 + j3.36  = 234.
84 + jl.62 = 234.85 L0 .40° V  Th e resulting voltage regulation is  Vp/a - VS()  VR = x 100% Vs.()  = 234. 85;0~ 230 V x 100% = 2.1%  At PF = 1.0, current Is = 65.2 L 0° A. Th erefore,  (2-62)  ':; = 230 LO° V + (0.0445 O X 65.2 LO° A ) + j(0.0645 ll)(65.2 LO° A )  = 230 LOo V + 2.90L OoV + 4.2 IL90o V  = 230 + 2.90 + j4.2 1  = 232.9 + j4.2 l = 232.94 L 1.04° V  Th e resulting voltage regulation is  VR = 232.9ijo ~ 230 V x 100% = 1.28%  At PF = 0.8 leading, current Is = 65.2 L36 .9° A. Therefor
e,  V  : = 230 LO° V + (0.0445 n X 65.2 ":::::36.9° A ) + j(0.0645 0 )(65.2 L36 .9° A )  = 230 LO° V + 2.90 L36 .9° V + 4.2 1 L 126.9° V  = 230 + 2.32 + jl.74 - 2.52 + j3.36  = 229.80 + j5.10 = 229.85 L 1.27° V  Th e resulting voltage regulation is  106 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  v  -!-'" 234.9 L 0.4° Y  V,,,,230LOoy jXoql, '" 4.21 L 53.1° Y  Roq l, '" 2.9 L - 36.9° Y  I,'" 65.2 L - 36.9°A  V  -.l'",2329L 104°Y , . .  1.1'~6~5~.2~L~O'~A~==:::::::==:::=~2:30~L~o:,~v~::JJ ) 4.21 L 90' 
V  2.9LOoy  ,hI  I, '" 65.2 L 36.9° A  V -.l'",2298L 127°Y " . .  L /==:::=========:}I L 1269' V  ~ a.:L36.90 Y  230LOoy  "I  fo'IG UR E 2-30  T ransformer phasor diagrams for E xample 2-5.  V R = 229. 852~0 ~ 230 V x 100% = -0.062%  Each of these three phasor diagrams is shown in Figure 2-30.  (d) Th e best way to plot the voltage regulation as a function of load is to repeat the  calculations in part c for m any different loads using MA TLAB. A program to do  this is show n below .  % M-file :
 tra n s_vr.m  % M-file to cal cula t e a n d p l o t the vo ltage r egula tio n  % o f a tra n s fo rm e r as a func tio n o f l oad f o r powe r  % facto r s o f 0 .8 lagg ing, 1.0, a nd 0 .8 l eading .  VS = 230; % Seco n dary vo ltage (V)  a m ps = 0: 6.52: 65 .2; % CU rrent va lues (A )  TRANSFORMERS 107  'oq  xoq  0.0445;  0.0645;  !l; Equ iva lent R (ohm s)  !l; Equ iva lent X (ohm s)  !l; Ca lc u late the c urrent va lu es for the three  !l; power factors. The fir s t row of I contains  
!l; the lagg ing c urrents, the second row contains  !l; the un ity c urrents, and the third row contains  , "0 leading c urrents.  I (1 , :) ~P' • ( 0.8 j*0.6) ;  I (2, :) ~P' • ( 1.0 I,  I (3, :) amps • ( 0.8 + j*0.6) ;  !l; Ca lc u late V P /a.  V Pa = VS + Req. * I + j. *Xeq. * I ;  !l; Ca lc u late vo ltage regulation  VR = (abs (V Pa ) - VS) ./ VS .* 1 00;  !l; P lo t the vo ltage regulation  p lo t (amps, VR( l ,:), 'b- ');  h o ld o n;  p lo t (amps, VR(2,:), 'k- ');  p lo t (amps, V R (
3,:), 'r- .');  • • •  t it le ('Vo ltage Regu latio n Ve rsu s Load' );  x labe l ('L oad (A )');  y labe l ('Voltage Regu latio n (%) ') ;  L agg ing  Unity  L eading  legend ('O.8 P F lagg ing','l.O P F','0.8 P F l eading');  h o ld o ff;  The plot produced by this program is shown in Figure 2-31.  (e) To find the efficiency of the transformer. first calculate its losses. The copper  losses are  Peu = (ls)2R eq = (65.2 A)2(0.0445ll) = 189 W  The core losses are given by  (Vp/a)2 (234.85 V)l  
P core = Rc = 1050 n = 52.5 W  The output power of the transformer at this power factor is  = (230 VX65.2 A) cos 36.9° = 12.()(X) W  Therefore. the efficiency of the transformer at this condition is  Vslscos ()  7f = x 100% Peu + P.: .... + Vslscos ()  = 189W + 52.5 W + 12.()(X)W x  = 98.03%  100%  (2-68)  108 ELECTR IC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Voltage regulation versus load  2.5 ~~Fln I I 0.8 PF lagging  ----1.0PF  _._.-0.8 PF leading 2  /  ......... :---o .-._._._ .••. _ ._ . __ ._ ._. __ ._. _
 •. _._ .-'-. . ---_.-.  --O.50!--..JIOc---2eO~-C3±O--C4"O---!50~--60±---!70  Load (A)  fo'IGURE 2-31  Plot of voltage regulation versus load for the transformer of Ex amp le 2--5.  2.8 TRANSFORMER TAPS AND  VOLTAGE REGULATION  In previo us sections of this chapter, transformers w ere described by their turns ra­ tios or by their primary-to-secondary-voltage ratios. Th roughout those sections, the  turns ratio of a given transformer was treated as though it were completely fixed.  In almost all 
real distribution transfonners. this is not quite true. Distribution trans­ fonners have a series of taps in the windings to pennit small changes in the turns  ratio ortile transfonner after it has left the factory. A typical installation might have  four taps in addition to the nominal setting with spacings of 2.5 percent of full-load  voltage between them. Such an arrangement provides for adjustments up to 5 per­ cent above or below the nominal voltage rating of the transfonner.  Exa mpl e 2-6
. A 500-kVA, 13,200/480-V distribution transfonner has four  2.5 percent taps on its primary winding. What are the voltage ratios of this transfonner at  each tap setting?  Solutioll  Th e five possible voltage ratings of this transfonner are  +5.0% tap  +2.5% tap  Nomin al rating  -2.5% tap  -5.0% tap  13,8601480 V  13,5301480 V  13,2001480 V  12,8701480 V  12,540/480 V  TRANSFORMERS 109  Th e taps on a transfonner permit the transfonner to be adjusted in the field  to accommodate variations in
 local voltages. H owever, these taps nonnally can­ not be changed while power is being applied to the transformer. They mu st be set  once and left alone.  Sometimes a transfonner is used on a power line whose voltage varies  widely with the load. Such voltage variations might be due to a high line imped­ ance between the generators on the power system and that particular load (perhaps  it is located far out in the country). Nonnal loads need to be supplied an essen­ tially constant voltage. H 
ow can a power company supply a controlled voltage  through high-impedance lines to loads which are constantly changing?  One solution to this problem is to use a special transformer called a tap  changing under load (TCUL ) transformer or voltage regulator. Basically, a T CUL  transformer is a transformer with the ability to change taps while power is con­ nected to it. A voltage regulator is a T CUL transfonner with built-in voltage sens­ ing circuitry that automatically changes taps to keep t
he system voltage constant.  Such special transformers are very common in modem power system s.  2.9 THE AUTOTRANSFORMER  On som e occasions it is desirable to change voltage levels by only a small runount.  For example, it ma y be necessary to increase a voltage from 110 to 120 V or from  13.2 to 13.8 kV The se small rises may be made necessary by voltage drops that  occur in power systems a long way from the generators. In such circumstances, it  is wasteful and excessively expensive to wind a
 transfonner with two full wind­ ings, each rated at about the same voltage. A special-purpose transformer, called  an autotransformer. is used instead.  A diagram of a step-up autotransfonner is show n in Figure 2-32. In Figure  2-32a, the two coils of the transform er are show n in the conventional manner. In  Figure 2-32b, the first winding is show n connected in an additive manner to the  second winding. Now , the relationship between the voltage on the first winding  and the voltage on the 
second winding is given by the turns ratio of the trans­ former. H oweve r, the voltage at the output of the whole transformer is the sum of  the voltage on the first w inding and the voltage on the second w inding. TIle first  winding here is called the common winding, because its voltage appears on both  sides of the transfonner. Th e smaller winding is called the series winding, because  it is connected in series with the comm on winding.  A diagram of a step-dow n autotransformer is show n i
n Figure 2-33. H ere  the voltage at the input is the sum of the voltages on the series winding and the  comm on winding, while the voltage at the output is just the voltage on the com­ m on winding.  Be cause the transformer coils are physically connected, a different tenni­ nology is used for the autotransformer than for other types of transformers. Th e  voltage on the common coil is called the common voltage V c, and the current in  that coil is called the common current [c. Th e voltage on 
the series coil is called  the series voltage V SE , and the current in that coil is called the series current IsE .  11 0 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (a) 'bJ  ""GU R E 2-32  A transfomler with its windings (a) connected in the conventional manner and (b) reconnected as an  autotransformer.  'H - IH ", ISE  • IL"' ISE+ Ic  I ~ I N~  I,  V H - •  ) V, Ic\ N,  ""GURE 2-.33  A step-down autotransformer connection.  TIle voltage and current on the low-vo ltage side of the transfonner are call
ed V L  and IL , respectively, while the corresponding quantities on the high-voltage side  of the transformer are called VH and IH . Th e primary side of the autotransfonner  (the side with power into it) can be either the high-voltage side or the low-vo ltage  side, depending on whether the autotransfonner is acting as a step-dow n or a step­ up transfonner. From Figure 2-32b the vo ltages and currents in the coils are re­ lated by the equations  Vc _ Nc  V SE - NSE  Nc Ic = NSE IsE  (2-68)  (
2-69)  TRANSFORMERS III  The voltages in the coils are related to the voltages at the tenninals by the equations  YL = Y e  YH = Y e + VSE  (2-70)  (2-71)  and the currents in the coils are related to the currents at the terminals by the  equations  IL= le+ lsE  IH = ISE  Voltage and Current Relationships in  an Autotransformer  (2-72)  (2-73)  What is the voltage relationship between the two sides of an autotransfonner? It  is quite easy to determine the relationship between Y Hand Vv Th e volt
age on the  high side of the autotransfonner is given by  (2-71 )  (2-74)  Finally, noting that Y L = V e, we get  (2-75)  (2-76)  Th e current relationship between the two sides of the transformer can be  found by noting that  IL = Ie + ISE  From Equation (2--69), Ie = (NSEINc) lsE' so  N>E  IL = N ISE + ISE  C  Finally, noting that Iy = ISE' we find  (2-72)  (2-77)  11 2 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  NSE + Nc - N IH  C  "'  I, NSE + Nc  IH - Nc  Th e Apparent Pow er R ating Ad vantage  of
 Aut otransform ers  (2-78)  (2-79)  It is interesting to note that not all the power traveling from the primary to the sec­ ondary in the autotransformer goes through the windings. As a result, if a con­ ventional transformer is reconnected as an autotransfonner, it can handle mu ch  more power than it was originally rated for.  To understand this idea, refer again to Figure 2-32b. N otice that the input  apparent power to the autotransformer is given by  Sin = VLIL  and the output apparent pow
er is given by  (2-80)  (2-81)  It is easy to show , by using the voltage and current equations [Equations (2-76) and  (2-79)], that the input apparent power is again equal to the output apparent power:  (2-82)  where SIO is defined to be the input and output apparent powers of the transform er.  H owever, the apparent pow er in the transfonner w indings is  (2-83)  1lle relationship between the power going into the primary (and out the sec­ ondary) of the transformer and the power in the transf
onner's actual windings can  be found as follows:  Sw = Vc lc  U sing Equation (2-79), we get  = VL(JL - IH )  = VLIL - ~IH  -s - 10N sE + Nc  (2-84)  (2-85)  TRANSFORMERS 113  Therefore, the ratio of the apparent power in the primary and secondary of the  autotransfonner to the app.:1.rent power actually traveling through its windings is  (2-86)  Equation (2--86) describes the apparent power rating advantage of an auto­ transform er over a conventional transfonner. H ere 5[0 is the apparent pow
er enter­ ing the primary and leaving the secondary of the transformer, while Sw is the ap­ parent power actually traveling through the transfonner's windings (the rest passes  from primary to secondary without being coupled through the transfonner's wind­ ings). Note that the smaller the series winding, the greater the advantage.  For example, a SOOO-kVA autotransfonner connecting a 11 O-kV system to a  138-kV system would have an NelNsE turns ratio of 110:28. Such an autotrans­ fonner would ac
tually have windings rated at  N"  Sw= SION + N.  " c 28  (2-85)  The autotransfonner would have windings rated at on ly about lOIS kVA , while a  conventional transformer doing the same job would need windings rated at S(x)()  kVA. The autotransfonner could be S times smaller than the conventional trans­ fonner and also would be mu ch less expensive. For this reason, it is very advanta­ geous to build transfonners between two nearly equal voltages as autotransfonners.  Th e following example il
lustrates autotransformer analysis and the rating  advantage of autotransformers.  Example 2-7. A 100-VA 120/12-V transformer is to be connected so as to form a  step-up autotransfonner (see Figure 2-34). A primary voltage of 120 V is applied to the  transformer.  (a) What is the secondary voltage of the transfonner?  (b) What is its maximum voltampere rating in this mode of operation?  (e) Calculate the rating advantage of this autotransfonner connection over the trans­ fonner's rating in conve
ntional 120112-V operation.  Solutioll  To accomplish a step-up transfonnation with a 120-V primary, the ratio of the HUllS on the  common winding Ne to the turns on the series winding NSE in this transfonner mu st be  120:12 (or 10:1).  (a) This transfonner is being used as a step-up transformer. The secondary voltage  is VH , and from Equation (2-75),  NSE + Ne  VH = Ne VL  = 12 + 120 120 V = 132 V  120  (2-75)  114 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  -,-------~+  •  -+~------+  Nd - 120) V'=12
0LO O V(  •  ""GU R E 2-34  The autotransformer of Ex amp le 2--7.  (b) The maximwn voltampere rating in either winding of this transfonner is 100 VA.  H ow much input or output apparent power can this provide? To fmd out, examine  the series winding. The voltage VSE on the winding is 12 V, and the voltampere rat­ ing of the winding is 100 VA. Therefore, the maximum series winding current is  100 VA = 8.33A  12V  Since ISE is equal to the secondary current Is (or IH) and since the secondary  vol
tage Vs = V H = 132 V, the secondary apparent power is  SOUl = VsIs = VHIH  = (132 V)(S.33 A) = 1100 VA = Sin  (e) The rating advantage can be calculated from part (b) or separately from Equa­ tion (2-86). From part b,  From Equation (2-86),  1100 VA = II 100 VA  S[o N SE + Ne  = Sw N SE  = 12+120 = 132 = 11  12 12  By either equation, the apparent power rating is increased by a factor of II.  (2-86)  It is not nonnaJly possible to just reconnect an ordinary transformer as an  autotransfonner an
d use it in the mann er of Example 2-7, because the insulation  on the low-voltage side of the ordinary transfonner may not be strong enough to  withstand the full output voltage of the autotransfonner connection. In transform- TRANSFORMERS  115  FIGURE  2-35  (a) A variable-voltage autotransformer. (b) Cutaway view  of  the autotransformer.  (Courtesy  of  Superior Electric Company.)  ers built spec ifi cally as autotransfonners, the  in sulation on  th e smaller co il  (the se­ ries winding) i
s made just as strong as the insulation on the larger coil.  It  is common practice  in  power system s to use autotransfonners whenever  two voltages fairly close to each o th er  in  level need to  be  transfonned, because the  closer the two voltages are, the greater the autotransformer power advantage  be­ com es.  1lley  are also used as variable transfo nner s,  where the low-vo lt age tap  m oves up and down the winding. This is a very co nv enient way to get a variable  ac  vo lt age. Su
ch a variable autotransfonner is show n  in  Fi gure  2- 35 .  Th e principal disadvantage of autotransformers is that, unlike ordinary  transformers,  there  is  a direct physical connection between the primary and the  secondary circuits,  so  th e  electrical isolation  of the two s id es is lost. If a particu­ lar application does not require electrical isolatio n,  then the autotransfonner is a  co nv enient and  inexpensive  way to  ti e nearly equal voltages together.  The Internal Impeda
nce  of  an  Autotransformer  Autotransformers have o ne  additional disadvantage compared to co nv e nti o nal  transfo rm ers.  It  turns out that, compared to a given transfo rm er connected in the  conventio nal  manner,  th e effective per-unit impedance  of  an  autotransformer is  smaller  by  a  fa ctor equal to the reciprocal of the power advantage of the auto­ transfonner connec ti o n.  Th e proof of this stateme nt  is left as a problem  at  the  e nd  of  th e chapte r.  Th e reduce
d internal impedance  of  an  autotransfonner compared to a co n­ ventional two-winding transfo rm er can  be  a se ri ous problem  in  som e app li ca ti ons  where the series impedance is needed to limit current flows during power system  faults  (s hort circuit s) . Th e effect  of  th e smaller internal impedance provided  by  an  autotransformer  mu st  be  taken into account  in  practical app li ca ti ons before auto­ transfonners are selected.   116 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Examp
 le 2-8. A transfonner is rated at 1000 kVA, 1211.2 kY, 60 H z when it is op­ erated as a conventional two-winding transformer. Under these conditions, its series resis­ tance and reactance are given as I and 8 percent per unit, respectively. This transfonner is  to be used as a 13.2I12-kV step-down autotransformer in a power distribution system. In  the autotransformer connection, (a) what is the transformer's rating when used in this man­ ner and (b) what is the transformer's series impedance 
in per-unit?  Solutio"  (a) The NclNsE turns ratio mu st be 12:1.2 or 10:1. The voltage rating of this trans­ former will be 13.2112 kV, and the apparent power (voltampere) rating will be  NSF. + Nc  5[0 = N SF. Sw  = 1+ IO I()(X)kVA = IIOOOkVA 1 '  (b) The transfonner's impedance in a per-unit system when cOIUlected in the con­ ventional manner is  Z oq = 0.01 + jO.08 pu separate windings  The apparent power advantage of this autotransfonner is II, so the per-unit im­ pedance of the autotransfo
nner connected as described is  0.01 + jO.08  Zoq= II  = 0.00091 + jOJ'lJ727 pu autotransformer  2,10 THREE-PHASE TRANSFORMERS  A lmost all the major pow er generation and distribution system s in the world today  are three-phase ac systems. Since three-phase system s play such an important role  in mod ern life, it is necessary to understand how transformers are used in them.  Transform ers for three-phase circuits can be constructed in one of two  way s. On e approach is simply to take three s
ingle-phase transformers and connect  them in a three-phase bank. An alternative approach is to mak e a three-phase  transfonner consisting of three sets of windings wrapped on a comm on core.  TIlese two possible types of transfonner construction are shown in Figures 2-36  and 2-37 . The construction of a sing le three-phase transformer is the preferred  practice today, since it is lighter, smaller, cheaper, and slightly m ore efficient. The  older construction approach wa s to use three separa
te transfonners. That approach  had the advantage that each unit in the bank could be replaced individually in the  event of trouble, but that does not outweig h the advantages of a combin ed three­ phase unit for mo st applications. H ow ever, there are still a great many installa­ tions consisting of three single-phase units in service.  A discussion of three-phase circuits is included in Appendix A. Sorne read­ ers may wish to refer to it before studying the following material.  TRAN SFORMERS
 117  N" N" N~  ~ f---< ~  f  No; N  ~ f---<  "  FIGURE 2-36  A three-phase transformer bank composed of independent transformers.  N  "  N~ No;  ~ ~ ~  N  " N" N"  ~ ~ ~  FIGURE 2-37  A three-phase transformer wound on a single three-legged COTe.  118 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Three-Phase Transformer Connections  A three-phase transfonner consists of three transformers, either separate or com­ bined on one core. Th e primaries and secondaries of any three-phase transfonner  can be inde
pendently connected in either a wye (Y ) or a delta (d ). This gives a to­ tal of four possible connections for a three-phase transfonner bank:  I. Wye-wye (Y-Y )  2. Wye-delta (Y -d)  3. Oelta-wye (d-Y )  4. Oelta-delta (d--&)  1llese connections are show n in Figure 2-38.  1lle key to analyzing any three-phase transformer bank is to look at a single  transfonner in the bank. A ny single transfonner in the bank behaves exactly like  the single-phase transformers already studied. 1lle impedance,
 voltage regula­ tion, efficiency, and similar caJcu lations for three-phase transfonners are done on  a per-phase basis, using exactly the sam e techniques already developed for  single-phase transfonners.  1lle advantages and disadvantages of each type of three-phase transfonner  connection are discussed below .  WYE-WYE CO NNE CTION. TIle Y-Y connection of three-phase transformers is  show n in Figure 2-38a. In a Y-Y connection, the primary voltage on each phase  of the transform er is given 
by V4>P = VLP / \G. Th e primary-phase voltage is re­ lated to the secondary-phase voltage by the turns ratio of the transform er. Th e  phase voltage on the secondary is then related to the line voltage on the secondary  by Vu; = \G V4>S.1llerefore, overall the voltage ratio on the transformer is  y - y (2-87)  1lle Y-Y connection has two very serious problem s:  I. If loads on the transfonner circuit are unbalanced, then the voltages on the  phases of the transfonner can become severely unbala
nced.  2. Third-harmonic voltages can be large.  If a three-phase set of voltages is applied to a Y -Y transfonner, the voltages  in any phase will be 120 0  apart from the voltages in any other phase. H owever, the  third-hannonic components of each of the three phases w ill be in phase with each  other, since there are three cycles in the third hann onic for each cycle of the fun­ damental frequency. Th ere are always som e third-harmonic comp onents in a  transfonner because of the nonlineari
ty of the core, and these comp onents add up.  TRANSFORMERS 119  " " • •  N" N"  b + +  b'  I  v.:(  •  N n  •  )+ v" N"  - - , - " • •  N n N"  " "  (.j  FIGU R E 2-38  Three-phase transfonner connections and wiring diagrams: (a) Y -V: (b) y-~: (e) ~ Y; (d) 6.~.  T he result is a very large third-harmonic component of voltage on top of the 50- ar 6O-H z fundamental voltage. This third-harmonic voltage can be larger than the  fundamental voltage itself.  B oth the unbalance problem and the third
-harmonic problem can be solved  using one of two techniques:  I. Solidly ground the neutrals of the transfonners, especially the primary wind­ ing's neutral. nlis connection permits the additive third-hannonic components  to cause a current flow in the neutral instead of building up large voltages. T he  neutral also provides a return path for any current imbalances in the load.  2. Add a third (tel1iary) winding connected in 11 to the transfonner bank. Ifa third  l1-connected winding is added 
to the transfonner, then the third-hannonic  120 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  components of voltage in the.1. will add up, causing a circulating current flow  within the winding. nlis suppresses the third-hannonic components of voltage  in the sam e manner as grounding the transfonner neutrals.  The .1.-connected tertiary windings need not even be brought out of the  transformer case, but they often are used to supply lights and auxiliary power  within the substation where it is located. Th 
e tertiary windings mu st be large  enough to handle the circulating currents, so they are usually made about  one-third the power rating of the two main windings.  One or the other of these correction techniques must be used any time a Y-Y  transfonner is installed. In practice, very few Y-Y transfonners are used, since the  sam e jobs can be done by one of the other types of three-phase transformers.  WYE-DELTA CONNECTION. TIle Y --d connection of three-phase transformers  is shown in Figure 2
-38b. In this connection, the primary line voltage is related to  the primary phase voltage by VLP = V3V4>p, while the secondary line voltage is  equal to the secondary phase voltage VLS = V <!>S' Th e voltage ratio of each phase is  V ~ =a  V.,  so the overall relationship betwccn the line voltage on the primary side of the  bank and the line voltage on the secondary side of the bank is  VLP _ V3Vp.p  VL'> - V4>S  I~~ = V3a (2-88)  TIle Y -.6. connection has no problem with third-hannonic compo
n ents in its  voltages, since they are consumed in a circulating current on the.1. side. nlis con­ nection is also m ore stable with respect to unbalanced loads, since the .1. partially  redistributes any imbalance that occurs.  TIlis arrangement does have one problem, though. Because of the connec­ tion, the secondary voltage is shifted 30" relative to the primary voltage of the  transformer.llle fact that a phase shift has occurred can cause problems in paral­ leling the secondaries of two tr
ansform er banks together. TIle phase angles of  transformer secondaries mu st be equal if they are to be paralleled, which m eans  that attention mu st be paid to the direction of the 3~'' phase shift occurring in each  transformer bank to be paralleled together.  In the Un ited States, it is customary to make the secondary voltage lag the  primary voltage by 30°. A lthough this is the standard, it has not always been ob­ served, and older installations mu st be checked very carefully before a 
new trans­ fonner is paralleled with them , to mak e sure that their phase angles match.  TRAN SFORMERS 121  V[J> r "  b • • N"  ::{  • Nn •  Nn b'  N"  N"  -:A.S  V~  • , "  "  v., ( N"  •  "LP  •  N" ) V.,  ,----'  b j b'  • •  N" Nn  , ~  " • •  N" Nn  ,b,  FIGURE 2-38  (b) Y -b. (continued)  Th e connection show n in Figure 2-38b will cause the secondary voltage to  be lagging if the system phase sequence is abc. Ifthe system phase sequence is  acb, then the connection show n in Figure 2-38b
 will cause the secondary voltage  to be leading the primary voltage by 30°.  DELTA-WYE CONNECT ION. A !:J..-Y connection of three-phase transformers is  show n in Figure 2-38c. In a !:J..-Y connection, the primary line voltage is equal to  the primary-phase voltage VLP = Vo/>p, while the secondary voltages are related by  VLS = V3V ¢S' TIlerefore, the line-to-line voltage ratio of this transformer con­ nection is  122 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  lj: .' + •  "  V LP [  V" "..-::;0+ N~ N" 
 N" V~  b • Nn N" N n  • • 0 b'  "  " + + •  V,,( N"  - - •  N" } "  +  b ~  I  • •  Nn N~  ,  - b'  • •  N" N"  (0)  ""GU R E 2-38  (e) d.-Y (continued)  V LP _ V4>P  VLS - V3"V¢>S  (2-89)  TIlis connection has the sam e advantages and the same phase shift as the  Y -.d transformer. TIle connection show n in Figure 2-38c make s the secondary  voltage lag the primary voltage by 30°, as before.  TRAN SFORMERS 123  Nn  • +d " + + •  )"LS v~[ Vii  N n •  N" Nn  ,  - b'  N" • v.,  •  b +  • c  " + +
 •  v,,[ N"  •  1 v" N"  d  -b _  I I  b'  • •  N" Nn  , ~  • •  Nn Nn  ,d,  FIGURE 2-38  (d) ~6. (concluded)  DELTA- D ELTA CONNECTION. 1lle .6.---d connection is show n in Figure 2-38d.  In a 11-11 connection, VLP = Vq.p and VLS = V.jtS, so the relationship between pri­ m ary and secondary line voltages is  (2-90)  This transformer has no phase shift associated with it and no problems with  unbalanced loads or hannonics.  Th e Per-U nit System for Th ree-Phase Transform ers  Th e per-unit syst
em of measurements applies just as w ell to three-phase trans­ fonners as to single-phase transformers. TIle single-phase base equations (2-53)  124 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  to (2-56) apply to three-phase system s on a per-phase basis. If the total base  voltampere value of the transfonner bank is called Sb ... , then the base voltampere  value of one of the transfonners SI4>.I>o .. is  S"'. SI4>.hase = - 3- (2-9\)  and the base phase current and impedance of the transfonner are  (2-92a)
  (2-92b)  (2-93a)  (2-93b)  L ine quantities on three-phase transformer banks can also be represented in  the per-unit system. 1lle relationship between the base line voltage and the base  phase voltage of the transformer depends on the connection of windings. If the  windings are connected in delta, VL .l>ose = V •• b ... , while if the windings are con­ nected in wye, V L hase = V3"V4>.ba ... 1lle base line current in a three-phase trans­ fonner bank is given by  (2-94)  1lle application of t
he per-unit system to three-phase transform er problems  is similar to its application in the single-phase examp les already given.  Example 2-9. A 50-kVA 13.S0CV20S-V 6.-Y distribution transformer has a resis­ tance of I percent and a reactance of 7 percent per lUlit.  (a) What is the transfonner's phase impedance referred to the high-voltage side?  (b) Calculate this transfonner's voltage regulation at full load and O.S PF lagging,  using the calculated high-side impedance.  (c) Calculate this
 transformer's voltage regulation under the same conditions, using  the per-unit system.  Solutioll  (a) The high-voltage side of this transfonner has a base line voltage of 13,800 V  and a base apparent power of 50 kVA. Since the primary is 6.-connected, its  phase voltage is equal to its line voltage. Therefore, its base impedance is  (2-93b)  TRANSFORMERS 125  = 3(13,SOOV)2 = II 426ll  50,DOOVA '  The per-unit impedance of the transfonner is  Zoq = 0.0 I + jJ.07 pu  so the high-side impedance
 in ohms is  Zoq = Zoq.~  = (0.01 + jJ.07 pu)(11,426 ll) = 114.2 + jSOOll  (b) To calculate the voltage regulation of a three-phase transfonner bank, determine  the voltage regulation of any single transformer in the bank. The voltages on a  single transfonner are phase voltages, so  V - aV  VR = #' V # x 100%  " " The rated transformer phase voltage on the primary is 13,SOO V, so the rated  phase current on the primary is given by  S  14> = 3V  •  The rated apparent power S = 50 kVA, so  _ 50,O
OOVA _  14> - 3(13,SOO V) - 1.20S A  The rated ph~ voltage on the secondary of the transfonner is 20S VI v'1 = 120 V. When  referred to the high-voltage side of the transformer, this voltage becomes V~ = aVotS  = 13,SOO V. A ssume that the transfonner secondary is operating at the rated voltage and  current, and find the resulting primary phase voltage:  V4>P = aV# + Roq l4> + jXoql4>  = 13,SOOLO ° V + (114.2 llX1.20SL -36.S7° A) + (iSOO llX1.20SL -36.S7° A)  = 13,SOO + 13SL -36.S7° + 966.4L53.1
3 °  = 13,SOO + 110.4 - jS2.S + 579.S + )773.1  = 14,490 + j690.3 = 14,506 L2.73° V  Therefore,  VR = V#, ~ aV# x 100%  ""  = 14,5~3 ~~3,SOO x 100% = 5.1%  (c) In the per-unit system, the output voltage is I L 0", and the current is I L -36.S7°.  Therefore, the input voltage is  Vp = I LO° + (O.OIXI L -36.S7°) + (i0.07XI L-36.S7°)  = I + O.OOS - jJ.OO6 + 0.042 + jO.056  = 1.05 + jO.05 = 1.051 L2.73°  126 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  The voltage regulation is  VR = 1.05~.~ 1.0 x 100% = 5.1%  
Of course, the voltage regulation of the transfonner bank is the same  whether the calculations are done in actual ohm s or in the per-unit system.  2.11 THREE-PHASE TRANSFORMATION  USING TWO TRANSFORMERS  In addition to the standard three-phase transfonner connections, there are ways to  perform three-phase transformation with only two transformers. All techniques  that do so involve a reduction in the power-handling capability of the transform­ ers, but they may be justified by certain economi
c situations.  Some of the more important two-transfonner connections are  I. Th e open-.6. (or V -V) connection  2. The open-Y -open-.6. connection  3. The Scott-Tconnection  4. Th e three-phase T connection  E:1.ch of these transfonner connections is described below.  The Open-.6. (or V-V) Connection  In som e situations a full transformer bank ma y not be used to accomp lish three­ phase transformation. For example, suppose that a .6.-.6. transform er bank com­ posed of separate transformers 
has a damaged phase that mu st be removed for re­ pair. 1lle resulting situation is show n in Figure 2-39. If the two remaining  secondary voltages are VA = V L 0° and VA = V L 120° V, then the voltage across  the gap where the third transfonner used 1.0 be is given by  Vc= - VA - VB  - - V LO ° - V L-120 °  - - V - (-0.5V - jO.866V)  - -0.5 V + jO.866V  = V L 120° V  1llis is exactly the same voltage that wou ld be present if the third transformer  were still there. Phase C is sometimes called 
a ghost phase. Thu s, the open-delta  connection lets a transfonner bank get by with only two transfonners, allowing  some power flow to continue even with a damaged phase removed.  H ow mu ch apparent power can the bank supply with one of its three trans­ fonners removed? At first, it seem s that it could supply two-thirds of its rated  TRANSFORMERS 127  , ~----------------~  HGURE 2-39  Th e open-a or v-v transformer connection.  v,  ------:--+  v,  VA ",VLOO V  VB '" V L 120" V  '---~b'  appa
rent power, since two-thirds of the transfonners are still present. Things are  not quite that simple, though. To understand what happens when a transfonner is  removed, see Figure 2-40.  Figure 2-40a shows the transformer bank in nonnal operation connected to  a resistive load. I f the rated voltage of one transformer in the bank is Vol> and the  rated current is It/» then the maximum power that can be supplied to the load is  P = 3V4,!4>cos (J  Th e angle between the voltage Vol> and the curre
nt 101> in each phase is 0° so the to­ tal power supplied by the transformer is  P = 3V4>I4> cos (J  = 3 V4>I4> (2-95)  The open-delta transfonner is shown in Figure 2-40b . It is important to note  the angles on the voltages and currents in this transfonner bank. B ecause one of  the transform er phases is missing, the transmission line current is now equal to the  phase current in each transformer, and the currents and voltages in the transfonner  bank differ in angle by 30°. Since the current
 and voltage angles differ in each of  the two transfonners, it is necessary to examine each transfonner individually to  determine the ma ximum power it can supply. For transfonner I, the voltage is at  an angle of 150° and the current is at an angle of 120°, so the expression for the  ma ximum power in transform er I is  P I = 3V4> 14> cos (150° - 120°)  = 3V4>I4> cos 30°  V1 = 2 V4>I4> (2-96)  128 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ..[f/. LOOA  Nn  I. L300A  •  - +  • \  V.L300y  N" + N" •  N
n  V. L -90oy  V. LI50o y  •  I. L --SXf' A  ..[3/. L 120° A  • -N n ..[fl. L _ 120° A I. L 150° A  -(.,  I. LO o A  I. L60 o A - Nn •  + V.L300y  N"  V. LI50o y  •  ~ L 120° A I. L 120° A  • N n •  I. L _ 120° A  - (b'  ""GU R E 2-40  (a) Voltages and currents in a ~--a transformer banlc. (b) Voltages and currents in an open-~  transformer banlc.  R  ,  •  •  , ,  0  •  d  R  ,  •  •  , ,  0  • d  For transfonner 2, the voltage is at an angle of 30° and the current is at an angle  of 60 °, so i
ts maximum power is  P2 = 3V4,!4> cos (30° - 60°)  = 3 V4> J4> cos (-30°)  v:l =""2 ~J4>  TIlerefore, the total ma ximum power of tile open-delta bank is given by  P = V3V4>J4>  (2-97)  (2-98)  TIle rated current is the sam e in each transfonner whether there are two or three of  them, and the voltage is the sam e on each transfonner; so the ratio of the output  power available from the open-delta bank. to the output power available from the  normal three-phase bank is  TRANSFORMERS 129  Popen<1
 _ V1"V,f,!1> _ _ , _ _  P - 3\1:[ - V3 - 0.577  3 phase 1> 1>  (2-99)  Th e available power out of the open-delta bank is only 57.7 percent of the origi­ nal bank's rating.  A good question that could be asked is: What happens to the rest of the  open-delta bank's rating? After all, the total power that the two transform ers to­ gether can produce is two-thirds that of the original bank's rating. To find out, ex­ amine the reactive power of the open-delta bank. T he reactive power of trans­ fon
ner I is  Ql = 3V1>J1> sin (150° - 120°)  = 3V1>J1> sin 30°  = YlV1>[1>  T he reactive power of transfonner 2 is  Q 2 = 3 V1> [1> sin (30° - 60°)  = 3 ~J1>sin (-300)  = -\-1; V1>J1>  T hus one transfonner is producing reactive power which the other one is con­ sumin g. It is this exchange of energy between the two transformers that limits the  power output to 57.7 percent of the orig inal bank s rating instead of the otherwise  expected 66.7 percent.  An alternative way to loo k at the rating of
 the open-delta connection is that  86.6 percent of the rating of the two remaining transformers can be used.  Open-delta connections are used occasionally when it is desired to supp ly a  small amount of three-phase power to an otherwise single-phase load . In such a  case, the connection in Figure 2-4 1 can be used, where transformer Tl is mu ch  larger than transfonner T t.  c -----------------,  "--,  • Th_·  T,  T , T,  )  Single- phase  pJu~ power  • power  • T,  •  b ----y  FIGU R E 2-41 
 U sing an open-<1 lransformer connection to supply a small amount of lhree-phase power along with a  lot of single-phase power. Transformer Tl is much larger than transformer h  130 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  V~C  , 0  •  Mi ssing  ph=  ""GU R E 2-42  • N"  :;."  •  N"  . ~ '"  • •  ,-----,-~o'  b ~--+, r-'--i-~b'  • •  co----- I--+-~,'  "  b'  V~  0'  Th e open-Y -open-~ transfonner connection and wiring diagram. Note that this connection is  identical to the y....a connection in Figur
e 3-38b. except for the absence of the thinl transformer and  the presence of the neutral lead.  Th e Op en-W ye-Op en-Delta Co nn ection  TIle open-wye-open-delta connection is very similar to the open-delta connection  except that the primary voltages are derived from two phases and the neutral. This  type of connection is show n in Figure 2-42. It is used to serve small commer cial  custome rs needing three-phase service in rural areas where all three phases are not  yet present on the power 
poles. With this connection, a custom er can get three­ phase service in a mak eshift fashion until demand requires installation of the third  phase on the power poles.  TRANSFORMERS 131  A major disadvantage of this connection is that a very large return current  mu st flow in the neutral of the primary circuit.  The Scott-T Connection  The Scott-T connection is a way to derive two phases 90° apart from a three-phase  power supply. In the early history of ac power transmission, two-phase and th
ree­ phase power system s were quite comm on. In those days, it was routinely neces­ sary to interconnect two- and three-phase power system s, and the Scott-T trans­ fonner connection was developed for that purpose.  Today, two-phase power is primarily limited to certain control applications,  but the Scott T is still used to produce the power needed to operate them.  Th e Scott T consists of two single-phase transform ers with identical ratings.  One has a tap on its primary winding at 86.6 per
cent of full-load voltage. 1lley are  connected as show n in Figure 2-43a. TIle 86.6 percent tap of transfonner T2 is  connected to the center tap of transform er Tl. Th e voltages applied to the primary  winding are show n in Figure 2-43b, and the resulting voltages applied to the pri­ maries of the two transformers are shown in Figure 2- 43c. Since these voltages  are 90° apart, they result in a two-phase output.  It is also possible to convert two-phase powe r into three-phase power with  thi
s connection, but since there are very few two-phase generators in use, this is  rarely done.  The Three-Phase T Connection  Th e Scott-T connection uses two transformers to convert three-phase power to  two-phase power at a different voltage level. By a simple modification of that  connection, the same two transfonners can also convert three-phase power to  three-phase power at a different voltage level. Such a connection is show n in Fig­ ure 2- 44. H ere both the primary and the secondary win
dings of transform er Tl are  tapped at the 86.6 percent point, and the taps are connected to the center taps of  the corresponding windings on transformer Tl. In this connection T] is called the  main transfonner and Tl is called the teaser transfonner.  A s in the Scott T, the three-phase input voltage produces two voltages 90°  apart on the primary windings of the transformers. TIlese primary voltages pro­ duce secondary voltages which are also 90° apart. Unlike the Scott T, though, the  seco
ndary voltages are recombined into a three-phase output.  One major advantage of the three-phase T connection over the other three­ phase two-transfonner connections (the open-delta and open-wye-open-delta) is  that a neutral can be connected to both the primary side and the secondary side of  the transfonner bank. This connection is sometimes used in self-contained three­ phase distribution transform ers, since its construction costs are lower than those  of a full three-phase transform er bank
.  Since the bottom parts of the teaser transfonner windings are not used on ei­ ther the primary or the secondary sides, they could be left off with no change in  perfonnance. 1llis is, in fact, typically done in distribution transform ers.  132 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  T,  +  b  86.6%  / tap  .<----- V "  Center  mp  V:( ,  + - O-----~--~  T,  " ab'" V L 120"  " /r<-",VLO"  "c~"'VL -12O"  (a)  T,  ~-----~. +  •  V"  T,  " p2 '" 0.866 V L 90"  )----V.  (b'  V  " S2"'- L'Xf' ,  (d'  ""
GU R E 2-43  " St '" -...t. L 0" ,  (,'  The Scolt-T transformer conneeliOll. (a) Wiring diagram; (b) the three-phase input voltages; (e) the  vollages on the transformer primary windings; (d) the two-phase secondary voltages.  +  Voo  Vro  V:(  " T,  (  N, 86.6%  ''P V"  Ce nter  b N, "p  " +  '-----'"  e  Vah ", V L 1200  V bc",VLO o  V...,'" V L _ 1200  >--__ V~  ,b,  N,  a"'­ N,  \~t  T,  '--_---'-__ .>V"  Vct",.!':L- 1200  "  Note:  FIG U R E 2-44  V V St '" V BC '" -Lr:f'  "  V a ",- V St 
- V S2  ,d,  ,,'  r-----------------Q n  ,  , T, A , + , 57.7% N, ,  "p + " ,  ,  ,  l _________  ) Vn  86.6% V~  "p  N, + B  " J,e -------V"  T, C  +  ,e,  }----- VBC '" * L 0 0  Va ",.!':L- 1200  "  ,.,  Th e three-phase T tr:I.nsformer connection. (a) W iring diagram; (b) the three-phase input voltages;  (e) the voltages on the transfonner primary windings; (d) the voltages on the transformer secondary  windings; (e) the resulting three-phase secondary voltages.  133  Va  134 ELECTRIC MACHINE
RY RJNDAMENTALS  2.12 TRANSFORMER RATINGS AND  RELATED PROBLEMS  Transfonners have four major ratings: apparent power, voltage, current, and fre­ quency. This section examines the ratings of a transfonner and explains why they  are chosen the way they are. It also considers the related question of the current  inrush that occurs when a transformer is first connected to the line.  The Voltage and Frequency Ratings  of a Tran sformer  TIle voltage rating of a transformer serves two functions. One 
is to protect the  winding insulation from breakdown due to an excessive voltage applied to it. TIlis  is not the m ost serious limitation in practical transfonners. TIle second function is  related to the ma gnetization curve and ma gnetization current of the transformer.  Figure 2-11 shows a ma gnetization curve for a transformer. If a steady-state  voltage  vet) = VM sin wi V  is applied to a transfonner's primary winding, the nux of the transfonner is given by  4>(t) = ~p f v(t) dt  = ~ fVM 
sinwtdt  p  VM - --coswt wN p  ('-100)  If the applied voltage v(t) is increased by 10 percent, the resulting maximum  nux in the core also increases by 10 percent. Above a certain point on the ma gne­ tization curve, though, a 10 percent increase in nux requires an increase in ma g­ netization current much larger than 10 percent. TIlis concept is illustrated in Fig­ ure 2- 45. As the voltage increases, the high-ma gnetization currents soon become  unacceptable. TIle maximum applied voltage (and
 therefore the rated voltage) is  set by the maximum acceptable ma gnetization current in the core.  Notice that voltage and frequency are related in a reciprocal fashion if the  maximum nux is to be held constant:  V_  q,max = wN p  (2-101)  TIlU S, if a 60-H z transfonner is to be operated on 50 H z, its applied voltage must  also be reduced by one-sixth or the peak nux in the core will be too high. TIlis re­ duction in applied voltage with frequency is called derating. Similarly, a 50-H z  tr
ansfonner may be operated at a 20 percent higher voltage on 60 H z if this action  does not cause insulation problem s.  TRAN SF O RMERS 135  ------+++-----1-3' ('" N/). A • turns  I 2 3  FIG URE 2-45  The elTect of the peak flux in a tnlnsformer core upon the required magnetization current.  Exa m ple 2-10. A l -kVA . 230/115-V. 60-Hz single-phase transfonner has 850  turns on the primary w inding and 425 llU1lS on the secondary w inding. Th e m agnetization  curve for this transfonn er is show
 n in Figure 2-46.  (a) Calculate and plot the m agnetization current of this transfonner w hen it is run  at 230 V on a 60-H z powe r source. Wh at is the rm s value of the m agnetization  clUTent?  (b) Ca lculate and plot the ma gnetization ClUTent of this transfonn er w hen it is nUl at  230 V on a 50-H z powe r source. Wh at is the rms value of the ma gnetization cur­ rent? H ow does this ClUTent com pare to the m agnetization current at 60 H z?  Solutioll  Th e best way to solve this proble
m is to calculate the flux as a function of time for this  core. and then use the m agnetization curve to transform each flux value to a corresponding  m agnetom otive force. Th e m agnetizing current can then be determined from the equation  136 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  M agnetization curve for 2301115· V transfonner  1.4 ~~=~=~:CC:;==;:=-';-'=;==-,-~  1.2  ~ 0.8  " ,  ti: 0.6  0.4  0.2  °0~-C2~OO~-~~c-0600~-C8~OO~-I"OOO~-c12000OCC1C~~-CI60000-cl ~800  MMF . A - turns  HGUR E 2-46
  M agnetization curve for the 2301115· V transfonner o f E xample 2- 10.  i=~ N, (2- 102)  A ssruning that the voltage applied to the core is v(t) = VM sin w t volts, the flux in  the core as a function of time is given by Equ ation (2-101 ):  ~(t) =  VM - --coswt wN, (2-100)  Th e ma g netization curve for this transfonn er is available electronically in a file called  m ag_curve_ l . dat . This file can be used by MATLAB to translate these flux values  into corresponding mmf values, and Equ a
tion (2- 102) can be used to fm d the required  ma g netization current values. Finally, the nns value of the m agnetization current can be  calculated from the equation  I = l IT Pdt - T O  A MATLAB program to perform these calculations is show n below :  ~ M-file, m ag_c urrent.m  ~ M-file t o calc ula t e a n d p lo t the mag n e tiza tio n  ~ c urre nt o f a 230 /11 5 tra n s fo rm e r ope ra ting a t  ~ 230 vo lts a n d 50 /60 Hz. This p rog ra m a l so  ~ calc ula t es the rm s va lue o f 
the mag . current.  ~ L oad the m agn e tiza tio n cu rve. It i s in two  ~ co lumn s, w ith the first column being mmf and  ~ the secon d co lumn be ing flux .  load m ag_c u rve_l.dat ;  mmf _da ta = m ag_c urve_l (:,l );  (2-103)  TRAN SF O RMERS 137  % Initia lize va lues  VM 325;  NP = 850;  % M ax imum vo ltage (V)  % Prim a ry turns  % Ca lc ula t e a n g ula r ve loc ity fo r 60 Hz  freq = 60; % Freq (Hz )  w = 2 * p i .. freq;  % Ca lc ula t e flux ver su s time  time 0,1 /300 0,1 /30; 
% 0 t o 1 /30 sec  flux = -VM /(w*NP ) * cos(w .* time );  % Ca lc ula t e the mmf correspo n d ing t o a g iven flux  % u s ing the flux 's inte rpo la tio n func tio n.  mmf = inte rp l (flux_da t a,mmf _da t a,flux );  % Ca lc ula t e the m agn e tiza tio n c urre nt  im = mmf 1 NP ;  % Ca lc ula t e the rm s va lue o f the c urre nt  irms = sqrt(sum (im. A 2 )/le n g th(im ));  d i sp( ['The rm s c urre nt a t 60 Hz i s " num 2str(inns) ] );  % Plo t the m agn e tiza tio n c urre nt.  fig ur
e (l )  s ubp lo t (2,1 ,1 ) ;  p lo t (time, im );  title ('\b fM agn e tiza tio n C urre nt a t 60 Hz' );  x labe l ('\b fTim e (s)');  y labe l ('\b f \itI_(m ) \rm (A )') ;  ax i s([O 0.04 - 2 2 ] );  g rid o n ;  % Ca lc ula t e a n g ula r ve loc ity fo r 50 Hz  freq = 50; % Freq (Hz )  w = 2 * p i .. freq;  % Ca lc ula t e flux ver su s time  time 0,1 /2500, 1 /25; % 0 t o 1 /25 sec  flux = -VM /(w*NP ) * cos(w .* time );  % Ca lc ula t e the mmf correspo n d ing t o a g iven flux  % u s 
ing the flux 's inte rpo la tio n func tio n.  mmf = inte rp l (flux_da t a,mmf _da t a,flux );  % Ca lc ula t e the m agn e tiza tio n c urre nt  im = mmf 1 N P ;  % Ca lc ula t e the rm s va lue o f the c urre nt  irms = sqrt(sum (im. A 2 )/le n g th(im ));  d i sp( ['The rm s c urre nt a t 50 Hz i s " num 2str(inns) ] );  138 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ~  '" -'  1.414  0.707  0  -0.7(17  - 1.414  0 0.005 om om5 om 0.025 0.Q3 0.Q35 0.04  Time (s)  ,,'  1.414,-,--"'C---,--,--,--"' __ --
-,----,  0.707 50H z  o  -0.7(17  -1.414:'---o~~~~cc!~--c'~--o+.co-~o-cc!=~ o 0.005 om om5 om 0.025 0.Q3 0.Q35 0.04  Time (s)  ,b,  ""GU R E 2-47  (a) M agnetization current for the transformer operating at 60 H z. (b) M agnetization current for the  transformer operating at 50 H z.  % Plo t the magnet izatio n curre nt.  subp lo t (2,1 ,2);  p lo t (t ime , im );  title ('\b fMagnet izatio n C urren t at 50 H z');  x labe l ('\b fTime (s)');  y labe l ('\b f \itI_{ m) \nn (A )');  axis([O 0 .04
 - 2 2 ]);  grid o n;  When this program executes, the results are  ,.. mag _ current  T he nn s c urrent at 60 H z is 0 .489 4  T he nn s c urrent at 50 H z is 0 .79252  The resulting magnetization currents are shown in Figure 2-47. Note that the nns magne­ tization current increases by more than 60 percent when the frequency changes from 60 H z  to 50 H z.  Th e Apparent Pow er Rating of a Transform er  TIle principal purpose of the apparent power rating of a transfonner is that, to­ gether wi
th the voltage rating, it sets the current flow through the transformer  windings. TIle current now is important because it controls the jlR losses in trans­ fonner, which in turn control the heating of the transformer coils. It is the heating  TRANSFORMERS 139  that is critical, since ove rheating the coi Is of a transformer drastically shortens the  life of its insulation.  Th e actual voltampere rating of a transfonner may be m ore than a single  value. In real transfonners, there ma y be a v
oltampere rating for the transformer  by itself, and another (higher) rating for the transform er with forced cooling. Th e  key idea behind the power rating is that the hot-spot temperature in the trans­ fonner windings must be limited to protect the life of the transfonner.  If a transfonner's voltage is reduced for any reason (e.g., if it is operated at a  lowe r frequency than normal), then the transfonner's voltrunpere rating mu st be re­ duced by an equal amount. If this is not done, then 
the current in the transfonner's  windings wi ll exceed the maximum pennissible level and cause overheating.  The Problem of Current Inrush  A problem related to the voltage level in the transfonner is the problem of current  inrush at starting. Suppose that the voltage  v(t) = VM sin (wi + 6) v (2-104)  is applied at the m oment the transfonner is first connected to the power line. Th e  maximum flux height reached on the first half-cycle of the applied voltage depends  on the phase of the volt
age at the time the voltage is applied. If the initial voltage is  vet) = VM sin (wi + 90°) = VM cos wt v (2-105)  and if the initial flux in the core is zero, then the maximum flux during the first  half-cycle wi ll just equal the maximum flux at steady state:  V=,  q,max = wN p  (2-101)  This flux level is just the steady-state flux, so it causes no special problem s. But  if the applied voltage happens to be  vet) = VM sin wi V  the maximum flux during the first half-cycle is given by  If"'· 
q,(t)= N p  0 VM sinwidt  VM I"'· ~ - --coswt wN p 0  VM ~ - - [(-1) - (1)[ wNp  (2-106)  This maximum flux is twice as high as the normal steady-state flux. If the  ma gnetization curve in Fig ure 2-11 is examined, it is easy to see that doub ling the  140 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Rated  current  ""GURE 2-48  v(I)=Vm sinrot  f\  Th e current inrush due to a transformer's magnetization current on starting.  maximum flux in the core results in an enonnous ma gnetization current. In fact, 
 for part of the cycle, the transformer looks like a short circuit, and a very large  current flows (see Figure 2-48).  For any other phase angle of the applied voltage between 90°, which is no  problem , and 0°, which is the worst case, there is som e excess current flow . Th e  applied phase angle of the voltage is not Ilonnally controlled on starting, so there  can be huge inrush currents during the first several cycles after the transfonner is  connected to the line. Th e transfonner and the
 power system to which it is con­ nected mu st be able to withstand these currents.  The Transformer Nameplate  A typical nam eplate from a distribution transformer is show n in Figure 2-49. TIle  infonnation on such a nam eplate includes rated voltage, rated kilovoltamperes, rated  frequency, and the transfonner per-unit series impedance. lt also shows the voltage  ratings for each tap on the transfonner and the wiring schematic of the transfonner.  Nam eplates such as the one show n also typic
ally include the transformer  type designation and references to its operating instructions.  2.13 INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS  Tw o special-purpose transfonners are used with power systems for taking mea ­ surem ents. One is the potential transfonner, and the other is the current transfonner.  TRANSFORMERS 141  I  ~ ! ,  ." j  ~~  3 PHASI: ClASS 0 A  iASIC 1Mf'UlSl UYEl  II'IWHtDHtG  l V I'll NIlItIG KV  Wl:IGHTSI~ PO INUS  1m:IIIOR  ..  NPlDOIC(WC  U.UDVOlTS  ~  xI "0 "l  ~ •••• ,r;::;::;::;::;: ~
  "0 x, "i "i  • , •  ~ :., .1:;-""1 I I I !  HI~I HO~ x, xl "l ~ 00 GROUND STlW' 11!  = I DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMER COIITAiNSHON-PCaATnr.(J'  a ~ ,-cccccccccc~cccccccc~ ______ -''''''' __ .. ~·"~··"'""" .. '·"·"·····"' .. ",-~  • f-a  ~ o  ~  FIGURE 2-49  , ,  ! ,  j  A sample distribution transfonner nameplate. Note the ratings li5ted: voltage, frequen>;y, apparem  power. and tap settings. (Courtesy o/General Electric Company.)  A potential transformer is a specially wound transformer with a hi
gh­ voltage primary and a low-vo ltage secondary. It has a very low power rating, and  its sole purpose is to provide a sample of the power system 's voltage to the in­ struments monitoring it. Since the principal purpose of the transfonner is voltage  sampling, it mu st be very accurate so as not to distort the true voltage values too  badly. Potential transfonners of several accuracy classes may be purchased de­ pending on how accurate the readings must be for a given application.  Current tra
nsformers sample the current in a line and reduce it to a safe and  m easurable level. A diagram of a typical current transformer is shown in Figure  2-50. The current transfonner consists of a secondary winding wrapped around a  ferromagnetic ring, with the single primary line running through the center of the  ring. 1lle ferromagnetic ring holds and concentrates a small sample of the flux  from the primary line. That flux then induces a voltage and current in the sec­ ondary winding.  A curren
t transformer differs from the other transform ers described in this  chapter in that its windings are loosely coupled. Unlike all the other transfonners,  the mutual flux <PM in the current transfonner is smaller than the leakage flux <PL­ Be cause of the loose coupling, the voltage and current ratios of Equations (2- 1)  to (2-5) do not apply to a current transfonner. Nev ertheless, the secondary current  142 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  - Instruments ""GURE 2-50  Sketch of a current trans
former.  in a current transfonner is directly proportional to the mu ch larger primary cur­ rent, and the device can provide an accurate sample of a line's current for mea­ surement purposes.  Current transformer ratings are given as ratios of primary to secondary cur­ rent. A typical current transfonner ratio might be 600:5,800:5, or 1000:5. A 5-A  rating is standard on the secondary of a current transfonner.  It is imponant to keep a current transfonner short-circuited at all times,  since ext
remely high voltages can appear across its open secondary terminals. In  fact, mo st relays and other devices using the current from a current transformer  have a shoning interlock which mu st be shut before the relay can be removed for  inspection or adjustment. Without this interlock, very dangerous high voltages  wi ll appear at the secondary terminals as the relay is removed from its socket.  2.14 SUMMARY  A transfonner is a device for converting electric energy at one voltage level to  elec
tric energy at another voltage level through the action of a ma gnetic field. It  plays an extremely important role in mod ern life by making possible the econom­ ical long-distance transmission of electric power.  Wh en a voltage is applied to the primary ofa transfonner, a flux is produced  in the core as given by Faraday's law. Th e changing flux in the core then induces  a voltage in the secondary winding of the transform er. Because transfonner cores  have very high penneability, the net ma
 gnetom otive force required in the core to  produce its flux is very small. Since the net ma gnetom otive force is very small,  the primary circuit's ma gnetomotive force mu st be approximately equal and op­ posite to the secondary circuit's ma gnetom otive force. nlis fact yields the trans­ fonner current ratio.  A real transfonner has leakage n uxes that pass through either the primary or  the secondary winding, but not both. In addition there are hysteresis, eddy current,  and copper losses.
 The se effects are accounted for in the equivalent circuit of the  TRAN SFORMERS 143  transfonner. Transfonner imperfections are m easured in a real transfonner by its  voltage regulation and its efficiency.  Th e per-unit system of mea surem ent is a convenient way to study system s  containing transformers, because in this system the different system vo ltage lev­ els disappear. In addition, the per-unit imp edances of a transfonner expressed to  its ow n ratings base fall within a relatively
 narrow range, providing a convenient  check for reasonableness in problem solutions.  An autotransformer differs from a reg ular transfonner in that the two wind­ ings of the autotransformer are connected. The voltage on one side of the trans­ fonner is the voltage across a single winding, while the voltage on the other side  of the transformer is the sum of the voltages across both windings. Be cause only  a portion of the power in an autotransformer actually passes through the windings,  an a
utotransfonner has a power rating advantage compared to a regular trans­ fonner of equal size. H oweve r, the connection destroys the electrical isolation be­ tween a transform er's primary and secondary sides.  Th e voltage levels of three-phase circuits can be transfonned by a proper  combination of tw o or three transfonners. Potential transfonners and current  transformers can sample the voltages and currents present in a circuit. B oth de­ vices are very comm on in large power distribution 
system s.  QUESTIONS  2-1. Is the ttU1lS ratio of a transfonner the same as the ratio of voltages across the trans­ fonner? Why or why not?  2-2. Why does the magnetization current impose an upper limit on the voltage applied to  a transformer core?  2-3. What components compo se the excitation current of a transfonner? H ow are they  modeled in the transformer's equivalent circuit?  2-4. What is the leakage flux in a transfonner? Why is it modeled in a transformer  equivalent circuit as an indu
ctor?  2-5, List and describe the types of losses that occur in a transfonner.  2-6. Why does the power factor of a load affect the voltage regulation of a transfonner?  2-7. Why does the short-circuit test essentially show only PR losses and not excitation  losses in a transfonner?  2-8. Why does the open-circuit test essentially show only excitation losses and not PR  losses?  2-9. H ow does the per-lUlit system of mea surement eliminate the problem of different  voltage levels in a power syst
em?  2-10. Why can autotransformers handle more power than conventional transformers of  the same size?  2-11, What are transfonner taps? Why are they used?  2-12. What are the problems associated with the Y -Y three-phase transformer cOlUlection?  2-13. What is a TCUL transformer?  2-14. H ow can three-phase transformation be accomplished using only two transformers?  What types of connections can be used? What are their advantages and disadvantages?  144 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  2- 1
5. Explain w hy the open-a transformer connection is limited to supplying 57.7 percent  of a norm al a -a transfonner bank's load.  2-16. C an a 60-H z transfonner be operated on a 50-H z system ? Wh at actions are neces­ sary to enable this operation?  2-17. Wh at happens to a transform er w hen it is first cotulected to a powe r line? C an any- thing be done to mitigate this problem ?  2-18. Wh at is a potential transformer? How is it used?  2-19. Wh at is a current transfonner? How is it used
?  2-20. A distribution transfonn er is rated at 18 kVA , 20,000/480 V, and 60 H z. Ca n this  transform er safely supply 15 kVA to a 4 15-V load at 50 H z? Wh y or w hy not?  2-21. Wh y does one hear a hwn w hen standing near a large powe r transform er?  PR O BL E M S  2-1. Th e secondary w inding ofa transfonn er has a terminal voltage of vi-t) = 282 .8 sin  377t V. Th e turns ratio of the transform er is 100:200 (a = 0.50). If the secondary  current of the transfonner is ii-t) = 7.rn sin (37
7t - 36.87°) A , what is the primary  current of this transfonner? Wh at are its voltage regulation and efficiency? The im­ pedances of this transfonner referred to the primary side are  ~=0. 20 0  X oq = 0.750 0  R c = 300 0  XM = 80 0  2-2. A 20-kVA 8(x)()/480-V distribution transformer has the follow ing resistances and  reactances:  Rp= 32 0  X p = 45 0  R c = 250 kfl  Rs = 0.05 0  Rs= 0.06 0  X M =30 kO  Th e excitation branch impedances are given referred to the high-voltage side of the  t
ransform er.  (a) Find the equivalent circuit of this transfonn er referred to the high-voltage side.  (b) Find the per-unit equivalent circuit of this transformer.  (c) A ssum e that this transform er is supplying rated load at 480 V and 0.8 PF lag­ ging. Wh at is this transform er's input voltage? Wh at is its voltage regulation?  (d) Wh at is the transfonner's efficiency under the conditions of part (c)?  2-3, A 1000-VA 2301115-V transform er has been tested to determine its equivalent cir­ c
uit. Th e results of the tests are show n below.  Op en-circuit test  Voc = 230V  loc = O.4S A  Poc = 30 W  S hort-circuit tcst  Vsc = 19.1 V  Isc = 8.7 A  P sc = 42.3 W  All data given we re taken from the primary side of the transformer.  TRAN SFORMERS 145  (a) Find the equivalent circuit of this transformer referred to the low-vo ltage side of  the transfonner.  (b) Find the transformer 's voltage regulation at rated conditions and (I) 0.8 PF lag­ ging, (2) 1.0 PF, (3) 0.8 PF leading.  (c) De
tennine the transfonner's efficiency at rated conditions and 0.8 PF lagging.  2-4. A single-phase power system is show n in Figure P2-1. Th e power source feeds a  lOO -kVA 14/2.4-kV transformer through a feeder impedance of 40.0 + jl50 n. Th e  transformer's equivalent series impedance referred to its low-vo ltage side is 0.12 +  jO.5 n. Th e load on the transfonner is 90 kW at 0.80 PF lagging and 2300 V.  (a) Wh at is the voltage at the power source of the system ?  (b) What is the voltage reg
ulation of the transfonner?  (c) H ow efficient is the overall power system ?  40fl jl50fl 0.12fl jO.5!l  • •  ( + Lood  90 kW  V, ,-,_-,0.g5 PF lagging  ~~~~~~~~----~~-~~  Source Feeder T ransformer Load  (transmission line)  FIGURE P2-1  The circuit of Problem 2-4.  2-5. Wh en travelers from the United States and Ca nada visit Europe, they encounter a  different power distribution system. W all voltages in N orth Am erica are 120 V nns  at 60 H z, while typical wall voltages in Europe are 220 
to 240 V at 50 H z. Many  travelers carry sma ll step-uplstep-dow n transfonners so that they can use their ap­ pliances in the countries that they are visiting. A typical transformer might be rated  at I kVA and 120/240 V. It has 500 turns of wire on the 120-V side and I ()(X) turns  of wire on the 240-V side. Th e magnetization curve for this transfonner is show n in  Figure P2-2, and can be found in file p22 .mag at this book's website.  (a) Suppose that this transfonner is connected to a 120
-V, 60-H z power source with  no load connected to the 240-V side. Sketch the magnetization current that  wo uld flow in the transformer. (U se MATLAB to plot the current accurately, if  it is available.) What is the nns amplitude of the m agnetization current? Wh at  percentage of full-load current is the magnetization clUTent?  (b) N ow suppose that this transformer is connected to a 240-V, 50-H z power source  w ith no load connected to the 120-V side. Sketch the magnetization current that  w
o uld flow in the transformer. (U se MATLAB to plot the current accurately, if  it is available.) What is the nns amplitude of the m agnetization current? Wh at  percentage of full-load current is the magnetization clUTent?  (c) In which case is the ma gnetization current a higher percentage of full-load cur­ rent? Wh y?  146 ELECTR IC M AC HINE R Y RJNDA M ENTALS  0 .001 2  0  ./'  V 8  /  0 .001  0 .000  ~  .. 0.(XX)6  o  / "  0 .000 4  V  2 v 0 o 100 150 200 250 300 350 400  0 .000  M:MF . A 
' turns  H GU R E 1'2-2  M agnetization curve for the transformer of Problem 2-5.  2-6. A 15-kVA 800CV230-V distribution transformer has an impedance referred to the pri­ mary of 80 + j300 il. Th e compon ents of the excitation branch referred to the pri­ mary side are Rc = 350 ill and XM = 70 kil.  (a) If the primary voltage is 7967 V and the load impedance is ZL = 3.0 + j1.5 n.  what is the secondary voltage of the transfonner? What is the voltage regulation  of the transfonner?  (b) If the lo
ad is discOIUlected and a capacitor of -j4.0 il is connected in its place.  what is the secondary voltage of the transfonner? Wh at is its voltage regulation  lUlder these conditions?  2-7. A 5OCXl-kVA 2301l3.8-kV single-phase power transfonner has a per-unit resistance  of I percent and a per-unit reactance of 5 percent (data taken from the transfonner's  nam eplate). Th e open-circuit test perform ed on the low-vo ltage side of the trans­ fonn er yielded the following data:  Voc = 13.8 kV loc 
= 15.1 A P oc = 44.9kW  (a) Find the equivalent circuit referred to the low-voltage side of this transfonn er.  (b) If the voltage on the secondary side is 13.8 kV and the power supplied is 4000  kW at 0.8 PF lagging. find the voltage regulation of the transfonner. Find its  efficiency.  450  TRANSFORMERS 147  2-8. A 200-MVA. 1512()()"'kV single-phase power transfonner has a per-unit resistance of  1.2 percent and a per-lUlit reactance of 5 percent (data taken from the transformer's  nameplate).
 The magnetizing impedance is jSO per unit.  (a) Find the equivalent circuit referred to the low-voltage side of this transformer.  (b) Calculate the voltage regulation of this transfonner for a full-load current at  power factor of 0.8 lagging.  (c) Assrune that the primary voltage of this transformer is a constant 15 kV. and  plot the secondary voltage as a function of load current for currents from no  load to full load. Repeat this process for power factors of O.S lagging. 1.0. and  0.8 lead
ing.  2-9. A three-phase transfonner bank is to handle 600 kVA and have a 34.5113.S-kV volt­ age ratio. Find the rating of each individual transformer in the bank (high voltage.  low voltage. turns ratio. and apparent power) if the transfonner bank is connected to  (a) Y -Y, (b) Y -/1, (c) /1-Y, (d) /1-11, (e) open 11, (j) open Y -open 11.  2-10. A 13,S00I4S0-V three-phase Y -I1-connected transfonner bank consists of three  identical lOO-kVA 7967/4S0-V transfonners. It is supplied with power dir
ectly from  a large constant-voltage bus. In the short-circuit test, the recorded values on the  high-voltage side for one of these transformers are  Vsc =5 60V h e = 12.6 A Psc = 3300W  (a) If this bank delivers a rated load at 0.85 PF lagging and rated voltage, what is  the line-to-line voltage on the high-voltage side of the transformer bank?  (b) What is the voltage regulation under these conditions?  (c) Assume that the primary voltage of this transformer is a constant 13.S kV, and  plot th
e secondary voltage as a function of load current for currents from no­ load to full-load. Repeat this process for power factors ofO.S5 lagging, 1.0, and  0.85 leading.  (d) Plot the voltage regulation of this transfonner as a function of load current for  currents from no-load to full-load. Repeat this process for power factors ofO.S5  lagging, 1.0, and 0.85 leading.  2-11. A lOO,()(X)-kVA, 23CVI15-kV /1-11 three-phase power transformer has a resistance of  0.02 pu and a reactance of 0.055 pu. 
The excitation branch elements are Re = 110 pu  and XM = 20 pu.  (a) If this transfonner supplies a load of SO MVA at 0.85 PF lagging, draw the pha­ sor diagram of one phase of the transformer.  (b) What is the voltage regulation of the transfonner bank under these conditions?  (c) Sketch the equivalent circuit referred to the low-voltage side of one phase of this  transformer. Calculate all the transfonner impedances referred to the low-voltage  side.  2-12. An autotransformer is used to connec
t a 13.2-kV distribution line to a 13.S-kV dis­ tribution line. It must be capable of handling 2CXXl kVA. There are three phases, con­ nected Y -Y with their neutrals solidly grounded.  (a) What mu st the Ne/NSF. IlU1lS ratio be to accomplish this cotulection?  (b) H ow much apparent power must the windings of each autotransfonner handle?  (c) If one of the autotransfonners were recOIUlected as an ordinary transformer,  what would its ratings be?  2-13. Two phases of a 13.S-kV three-phase distri
bution line serve a remote rural road (the  neutral is also available). A fanner along the road has a 480-V feeder supplying  148 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  120 kW at 0.8 PF lagging of three-phase loads, plus 50 kW at 0.9 PF lagging of  single-phase loads. The single-phase loads are distributed evenly among the three  phases. Assuming that the ~n-Y -open-6. connection is used to supply power to his  fann, find the voltages and currents in each of the two transformers. Also find the real 
 and reactive powers supplied by each transfonner. Asswn e the transformers are ideal.  2- 14. A 13.2-kV single-phase generator supplies power to a load through a transmission  line. Th e load's impedance is L1 0ad = 500 L 36.870 n, and the transmission line's  impedance is 21m. = 60 L 53.10 n.  6O L 531°n  z,~  ( ~)Ve"'13.2LOO kV 500L 36.87°n z~  "J  6O L 53 Ion  1:10 10: I 500L 36.87°n  • • • •  ( ~ ) ve'" 13.2L OO kV z~  'bJ  FIGU R E 1'2-3  Circuits for Problem 2-14: (a) without transformers
 and (b) with transformers.  (a) If the generator is directly connected to the load (Figure P2-3a), what is the ra­ tio of the load voltage to the generated voltage? What are the transmission  losses of the system ?  (b) If a 1:10 step-up transfonn er is placed at the output of the generator and a 10: I  transformer is placed at the load end of the transmi ssion line, what is the new  ratio of the load voltage to the generated voltage? What are the transmission  losses of the system now? (Note: 
Th e transfonners may be assum ed to be ideal.)  2-15. A 5000-VA, 4801120-V conventional transfonner is to be used to supply power from  a 600-V source to a 120-V load. Cons ider the transfonner to be ideal, and assrune  that all insulation can handle 600 V.  (a) Sketch the transfonn er cOIUlection that w ill do the required job.  (b) Find the kilovoltampere rating of the transfonner in the configuration.  (c) Find the maximum primary and secondary currents lUlder these conditions.  TRANSFORMERS
 149  2-16. A 5000-VA. 4801120-V conventional transformer is to be used to supply power from  a 6()()'" V source to a 480-V load. Consider the transfonner to be ideal. and assrune  that all insulation can handle 600 V. Answer the questions of Problem 2-15 for this  transformer.  2-17. Prove the following statement: If a transfonner having a series impedance Zeq is con­ nected as an autotransfonner. its per-unit series impedance Z~ as an autotransfonner  will be  Note that this expression is the 
reciprocal of the autotransformer power advantage.  2-18. Three 25-kVA. 24.000/277-V distribution transformers are connected in /1-y. The  open-circuit test was performed on the low-voltage side of this transformer bank.  and the following data were recorded:  V~"".OC = 480 V I~"".oc = 4.10 A PJ.,OC = 945 W  The short-circuit test wa s performed on the high-voltage side of this transformer  bank., and the following data were recorded:  V~"".sc = 1600 V Ir",e.sc = 2.00 A P~sc = 1150W  (a) Find th
e per-lUlit equivalent circuit of this transformer bank.  (b) Find the voltage regulation of this transfonner bank. at the rated load and  0.90 PF lagging.  (c) What is the transformer bank's efficiency under these conditions?  2-19. A 20-kVA. 20,OOO/480-V, 60-Hz distribution transformer is tested with the follow­ ing results:  Open-circuit test  ( mcas u~d from st.'eondary side)  Voc = 480V  loc = I.60A  Poc = 305 W  Short-circuit test  (m easun.>d from primary side)  Vsc = 1130 V  Isc = UX) A 
 Psc =260W  (a) Find the per-lUlit equivalent circuit for this transformer at 60 H z.  (b) What would the rating of this transfonner be if it were operated on a 50-H z  power system?  (c) Sketch the per-lUlit equivalent circuit of this transfonner referred to the primary  side if it is operating at 50 H z.  2-20. Prove that the three-phase system of voltages on the secondary of the Y -/1 trans­ fonner shown in Figure 2-38b lags the three-phase system of voltages on the pri­ mary of the transform
er by 30°.  2-21. Prove that the three-phase system of voltages on the secondary of the /1-Y trans­ fonner shown in Figure 2-38c lags the three-phase system of voltages on the pri­ mary of the transformer by 30°.  2-22. A single-phase lO-kVA, 4801120-V transformer is to be used as an autotransfonner  tying a 600-V distribution line to a 480-V load. When it is tested as a conventional  150 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  transfonner, the following values are measured on the primary (480-V) sid
e of the  transformer:  Ope n,circuit tcst  Voe = 480 V  loe = 0.41 A  Poe = 38W  Short,circuit test  Vsc = 10.0 V  Isc = 1O.6A  P sc = 26W  (a) Find the per-unit equivalent circuit of this transfonner when it is connected in the  conventional ma/Uler. What is the efficiency of the transfonner at rated condi­ tions and lUlity power factor? What is the voltage regulation at those conditions?  (b) Sketch the transfonner connections when it is used as a 600/480-V step-down  autotransfonner.  (c) Wh
at is the kilovoltampere rating of this transformer when it is used in the au­ totransformer connection?  (d) Answer the questions in a for the autotransformer connection.  2-23. Figure P2-4 shows a power system consisting of a three-phase 480-V 60-H z gener­ ator supplying two loads through a transmission line with a pair of transfonners at  either end.  Generator  41lO V  T, ~~~~~ _ _ _ T,  480114.400 V  ](XXl kVA  R "'O.OlOpu  X ",0.040pu  ""GU R E "2-4  Line  ZL",1.5+jIOO 14.4001480 V  500 k
VA  R", 0.020 pu  X =0.085 pu  Lood I  ZLood t- 0.45L 36.87°n  Y - connected  Lood2  ZLood 2 '"  -jO.8ll  Y - connected  A one-tine diagram of the power system of Problem 2-23. Note that some impedance values are  given in the per-unit system. while others are given in ohms.  (a) Sketch the per-phase equivalent circuit of this power system.  (b) With the switch opened, find the real power P, reactive power Q, and apparent  power S supplied by the generator. What is the power factor of the genera
tor?  (c) With the sw itch closed, find the real power P , reactive power Q, and apparent  power S supplied by the generator. What is the power factor of the generator?  (d) What are the transmission losses (transformer plus transmission line losses) in  this system with the switch open? With the sw itch closed? What is the effect of  adding load 2 to the system?  TRAN SF O RMERS 151  REFERENCES  1. B eeman. Donald. Industrial Po .... er Systems H mwbook. N ew York: M cGraw- H ill. 1955.  2. Del
 TOTO. V. Eloctric M achines and Po· .... er Systems. E nglewood ClilTs. N .J.: Prentice-H all. 1985.  3. Feinberg. R . M odern P o .... er Transformer P ractiCl!. N ew Y ork: W iley. 1979.  4. Fitzgerald. A. E .• C. K ingsley. Jr .• and S. D . Um aos. Eloctric M achinery. 5th ed. N ew Yort:  M cGraw- H ill. 1990.  5. M cPherson. George. An Introduction 10 Electrical M achines and Transformers. N ew York: Wiley.  1981.  6. M .l.T. Staff. M agnetic Circuits and Transformers. N ew York: Wiley. 194
3.  7. Siemon. G. R .• and A. Stra.ughen. Electric M achines. R eading. M ass.: Addison-W esley. 1980.  8. Electrical Transmission and Distribution Reference B ook. E ast Pittsburgh: W estinghouse E le(;tric  Corpora.tion.1964.  CHAPTER  3  INTRODUCTION TO  POWER ELECTRONICS  O ver the last 40 years, a revolution has occurred in the application of electric  motors. 1lle development of solid-state m otor drive packages has progressed  to the point where practically any power control problem can b
e solved by using  them. With such solid-state drives, it is possible to run de m otors from ac powe r  supplies or ac m otors from de power supplies. It is even possible to change ac  power at one frequency to ac power at another frequency.  Furthermore, the costs of solid-state drive systems have decreased dramati­ cally, while their reliability has increased. TIle versatility and the relatively low  cost of solid-state controls and drives have resulted in many new applications for  ac m otors
 in which they are doing jobs formerly done by dc ma chines. DC m otors  have also gained flexibility from the application of solid-state drives.  nlis major change has resulted from the development and improvem ent of a  series of high-power solid-state devices. Although the detailed study of such power  electronic circuits and compon ents would require a book in itself, some familiarity  with them is important to an understanding of m odem m otor applications.  nlis chapter is a brief introduc
tion to high-power electronic compon ents  and to the circuits in which they are employed. It is placed at this point in the book  because the material contained in it is used in the discussions of both ac motor  controllers and dc m otor controllers.  3.1 POWER ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS  Several major types of semiconductor devices are used in m otor-control circuits.  Among the more imp ortant are  152  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 153  I. 1lle diode  2. 1lle two-wire thyristor (or PNPN dio
de)  3. 1lle three-wire thyristor [or silicon controlled rectifier (SCR)]  4. 1lle gate turnoff(GT O) thyristor  5. 1lle DlAC  6. 1lle TRIAC  7. 1lle power transistor (PTR )  8. 1lle insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT )  Circuits containing these eight devices are studied in this chapter. Before the cir­ cuits are examined, though, it is necessary to understand what each device does.  The Diode  A diode is a semiconductor device designed to conduct current in one direction  only. The symbol
 for this device is show n in Figure 3-1. A diode is designed to  conduct current from its anode to its cathode, but not in the opposite direction.  The voltage-current characteristic of a diode is show n in Figure 3-2. Wh en  a voltage is applied to the diode in the forward direction, a large current flow re­ sults. Wh en a voltage is applied to the diode in the reverse direction, the current  flow is limited to a very small value (on the order of microamp eres or less). If a  large enough reve
rse voltage is applied to the diode, eventually the diode will  break down and allow current to flow in the reverse direction. 1llese three regions  of diode operation are show n on the characteristic in Figure 3-2.  Diodes are rated by the amount of power they can safely dissipate and by the  maximum reverse voltage that they can take before breaking down. The power  v,  Anode  PIV 'D  Cathode  FIGURE 3-1 FIGURE 3-2  Th e symbol of a diode. Voltage-current characteristic of a diode.  154 ELECTR
IC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  FIGU RE 3-3  The symbol of a two-wire thyristor or PNPN diode.  dissipaled by a diode during forward operation is equal to the forward voltage drop  across the diode times the current flowing through it. 1l1is power mu st be limited  to protect the diode from overheating. llle maximum reverse voltage of a diode is  know n as its peak inverse voltage (PlY ). It mu st be high enough to ensure that the  diode does not break down in a circuit and conduct in the revers
e direction.  Diodes are also rated by their sw itching time, that is, by the time it takes to  go from the off state to the on state, and vice versa. B ecause power diodes are  large, high-powe r devices with a lot of stored charge in their junctions, they  sw itch states mu ch more slow ly than the diodes found in electronic circuits. E s­ sentially all power diodes can sw itch states fast enough to be used as rectifiers in  50- or 60-H z circuits. H owever, some applications such as pulse-wid
th modu­ lation (PWM ) can require power diodes to sw itch states at rates higher than  10,000 H z. For these very fast sw itching applications, special diodes called fast­ recovery high-speed diodes are employed.  The Two-Wire Thyristor or PNPN Diode  Thyristor is the generic nam e given to a family of semiconductor devices which are  made up of four semiconductor layers. One member of this fmnily is the two-wire  thyristor, also known as the PN PN diode or trigger diode.1l1is device's nam e in
 the  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standard for graphic sym­ bols is reverse-blocking diode-f}pe thyristor. Its symbol is show n in Figure 3-3.  llle PNPN diode is a rectifier or diode with an unusual voltage-current  characteristic in the forward-biased region. Its voltage-current characteristic is  show n in Figure 3-4.llle characteristic curve consists of three regions:  I. Th e reverse-blocking region  2. Th e forward-blocking region  ), Th e conducting region  In
 the reverse-blocking region, the PNPN diode behaves as an ordinary  diode and blocks all current flow until the reverse breakdown voltage is reached.  In the conducting region, the PNPN diode again behaves as an ordinary diode, al­ low ing large amounts of current to flow with very little voltage drop. It is the  forward-blocking region that distinguishes a PNPN diode from an ordinary diode.  v,  ;D I Aooo.  +  ;G )D  Gate  Cathode  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 155  ------- ""GURE3-S  ""
GU R E 3-4  Voltage-current characteristic of  a PNPN diode.  The syntbol of a three-wire thyristor or SCR.  Wh en a PNPN diode is forward-biased, no current flows until the forward  voltage drop exceeds a certain value called the breakover voltage VBO . Wh en the  forward voltage across the PNPN diode exceeds VBO ' the PNPN diode turns on  and remnins on until the current flowing through it falls below a certain minimum  value (typically a few milliamperes). I fthe current is reduced to a value
 below this  minimum value (called the holding current lu), the PNPN diode turns off and will  not conduct until the forward voltage drop again exceeds VBO .  In summary , a PNPN diode  I. Turns on when the applied voltage vD exceeds VBO  2. Turns off when the current iD drops below lu  3. Blocks all current flow in the reverse direction until the maximum reverse  voltage is exceeded  Th e Thr ee-Wi re Th yristor or SC R  T he m ost important m ember of the thyristor frunily is the three-wire th
yristor, also  know n as the silicon controlled rectifier or SCR. T his device was developed  and given the name SCR by the General Electric Company in 1958. 1lle name  thyristor was adopted later by the Int.ernational Electrotechnical Commission  (IEC). 1lle symbol for a three-wire thyristor or SCR is show n in Figure 3-5.  156 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ""GURE 3-6  Voltage-current characteristics of an SC R.  As the name suggests, the SCR is a controlled rectifier or diode. Its voltage­ 
current characteristic with the gate lead open is the same as that of a PNPN diode.  What make s an SCR especially useful in m otor-control applications is that  the breakover or turn-on voltage of the device can be adjusted by a current flow­ ing into its gate lead. TIle largerthe gate current, the lowe r VB O becomes (see Fig­ ure 3--6). If an SCR is chosen so that its breakover voltage with no gate signal is  larger than the highest voltage in the circuit, then it can only be turned on by the
  application of a gate current. Once it is on, the device stays on until its current  falls below IH' Th erefore, once an SCR is triggered, its gate current ma y be re­ m oved without affecting the on state of the device. In the on state, the forward  voltage drop across the SCR is about 1.21.0 1.5 times larger than the voltage drop  across an ordinary forward-biased diode.  TIll"Ce-wire thyristors or SCRs are by far the m ost comm on devices used in  power-control circuits. TIley are widely us
ed for switching or rectification appli­ cations and are currently available in ratings ranging from a few amperes up to a  maximum of about 3()(x) A.  In summary, an SCR  I. Turns on when the voltage vD applied to it exceeds VBO  2. H as a breakover voltage VBO whose level is controlled by the amount of gate  current io present in the SCR  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 157  Anode  Cathode  (,'  Several amperes to I r;:;.. II 2~s - 30p,s  several tens of _L_l<.,'==::::::I===\---J,,---, (+,
 amperes _  ()  20 Alp,s - 50 Alp,s-----'  (b'  FIGU RE 3-7  One-fourth to one-sixth of  the -·00" currem  (a) The symbol of a gate turn-off thyristor (GTO ). (b) The gate current waveform required to turn a  GTO thyristor on aod off.  3. Turns off when the current iD flowing through it drops below IH  4. Blocks all current flow in the reverse direction until the maximum reverse  voltage is exceeded  Th e Ca te Thrn ofT Th yristor  Am ong the recent improvem ents to the thyristor is the gate tur
noff (Cm ) thyris­ tor. A cm thyristor is an SCR that can be turned off by a large enough negative  pulse at its gate lead even if the current iD exceeds IH. Although G T O thyristors  have been around since the 1960s, they only became practical for motor-control  applications in the late 1970s. Such devices are becoming mor e and m ore com­ mon in m otor-control packages, since they eliminate the need for external com­ ponents to turn off SCRs in dc circuits (see Section 3.5). T he symbol for a
 G T O  thyristor is shown in Figure 3-7a.  Figure 3-7b show s a typical gate current waveform for a high-power G T O  thyristor. A G T O thyristor typically requires a larger gate current for turn-on than  an ordinary SCR. For large high-power devices, gate currents on the order of  \0 A or more are necessary. To turn off the device, a large negative current pulse  of 20- to 30-iJ.s duration is required. TIle ma gnitude of the negative current pulse  mu st be one-fourth to one-sixth that of the
 current flowing through the device.  158 ELECTR IC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  FIGU R E 3-8  Th e symbo l of a DIAC.  -------- ---<~------------r-------------~-- 'D ------__ ~ ~o  ""GURE 3-9  Voltage-current characteristic of a DiAC.  The DIA C  A DIA C is a device containing five semiconductor layers (PNPNP ) that behaves  like two PNPN diodes connected back to back. It can conduct in either direction  once the breakover voltage is exceeded. Th e symb ol for a DIA C is shown in Fig­ ure 3--8, a
nd its current-voltage characteristic is shown in Figure 3-9. It turns on  when the applied voltage in either direction exceeds VBO . Once it is turned on, a  DIAC remains on until its current falls below ly.  The TRIAC  A TRI AC is a device that behaves like two SCRs connected back to back with  a comm on gate lead. It can conduct in either direction once its breakover voltage  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 159  +  G  ""GURE 3-10  The symbol of a lRIAC.  FIGURE 3-11  Voltage-current chara
cteristic of a lRIAC.  is exceeded. Th e symb ol for a TRIAC is show n in Figure 3- 10, and its current­ voltage characteristic is show n in Figure 3-11. Th e breakover voltage in a TRIAC  decreases with increasing gate current in just the same manner as it does in an  SCR, except that a TRIA C responds to either positive or negative pulses at its  gate. Once it is turned on, a TRI AC remains on until its current falls below [y.  Be cause a single TRIAC can conduct in both directions, it can rep
lace a  more complex pair of back-to-back SCRs in many ac control circuits. H oweve r,  TRIA Cs generally sw itch more slow ly than SCRs, and are available only at lower  power ratings. A s a result, their use is largely restricted to low- to medium-power  applications in 50- or 6O- H z circuits, such as simple lighting circuits.  160 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Collector  'c I  <  .~  E  " }c,  §  0  - -Ba se  Q  )i  0  U  Emitter  ,.,  Emitter-collector voltage veE> V  ,b,  ""GURE 3-12 
 (a) The symbol ofa power transistor. (b) Th e voltage-current characteristic of a power transistor.  T he Power Tra nsistor  TIle symb ol for a transistor is show n in Figure 3- 12a, and the collector-to-emitter  voltage versus collector current characteristic for the device is shown in Figure  3-12b. As can be seen from the characteristic in Figure 3-12b, the transistor is a  device whose col lector current ie is directl y proportional 10 its base current iB over  a very wide range of collecto
r-to-emitter vollages (VCE ).  Powe r transistors (PTR s) are comm only used in ma chinery-control applica­ tions to sw itch a current on or off. A transistor with a resistive load is show n in  Figure 3-13a, and its ie-VcE characteristic is show n in Figure 3- 13b with the load  line of the resistive load. Transistors are nonnally used in ma chinery-control ap­ plications as sw itches; as such they should be either completely on or completely  off. As show n in Figure 3-13b, a base current of i
B4 would completely turn on this  transistor, and a base current of zero would completel y turn off the transistor.  If the base current of this transistor were equal to iB3 , then the transistor  would be neither fully on nor fully off. T his is a very undesirable condition, since  a large collector current will flow across a large collector-to-emitter vollage vcr,  dissipati ng a lot of power in the transistor. To ensure that the transistor conducts  without wasting a lot of power, it is neces
sary to have a base current high enough  to completely saturate it.  Powe r transistors are m ost often used in inverter circuits. T heir m~or draw­ back in sw itching applications is that large power transistors are relatively slow in  changing from the on to the off state and vice versa, since a relatively large base  current has to be applied or removed when they are turned on or off.  +v  (a)  FIGURE 3-13  .~  • ! ,  " • • u  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 161  0,  Off  Emitter-collecto
r voltage VCE  ,b,  (a) A transistor with a resistive load. (b) The voltage-current characteristic of this transistor and load.  Collector  GateQ _____ ~  fo'IGURE 3-14  Emitter The symbo l of an IGBT.  The Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor  The insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGB T ) is a relatively recent development. It  is similar to the power transistor, except that it is controlled by the voltage applied  to a gate rather than the current flow ing into the base as in the power transisto
r. Th e  impedan ce of the control gate is very high in an IGB T, so the amount of current  flow ing in the gate is extremely small. Th e device is essentially equivalent to the  combination of a rnetal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET ) and  a power transistor. llle symbol of an IGBT is show n in Figure 3-14.  162 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Since the IGBT is controlled by a gate voltage with very little current flow,  it can sw itch mu ch more rapidly than a conventio
nal power transistor can. IGBTs  are therefore being used in high-power high-frequency applications.  Pow er and Speed Co mp arison of Pow er Electronic  Co mp onents  Figure 3- 15 show s a comparison of the relative speeds and power-handling capa­ bilities of SCRs, G T O thyristors, and power transistors. Clearly SCRs are capable  of higher-power operation than any of the other devices. G T O thyristors can op­ erate at almost as high a power and mu ch faster than SCRs. Finally, power tran­ sis
tors can handle less power than either type of thyristor, but they can sw itch  more than 10 times faster.  10'  10' -,  ---1..-- \ \ < \ > ,  ~GTO !  10' \ , \  " \ \ 0  x \  a \  ~ 10' , \  ~  /\ ,  \ ,  & SCR \ \  i  10' , \  )  \  0 I  " I  I  10' I  I ITR  I  I  10' I  10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10'  Operating frequency. H z  ""GU R E 3-15  A comparison of the relative speeds and power-handling capabilities of SCRs. GTO thyristors. and  power transistors.  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 163  
3.2 BASIC RECTIFIER CIRCUITS  A rectifier circuit is a circuit that converts ac power to dc power. Th ere are man y  different rectifier circuits which produce varying degrees of sm oothing in their dc  output. TIle four m ost comm on rectifier circuits are  I. TIle half-wave rectifier  2. TIle full-wave bridge rectifier  3. TIle three-phase half-wave rectifier  4. TIle three-phase full-wave rectifier  A good mea sure of the smoothness of the dc voltage out of a rectifier circuit  is the ripple 
factor of the dc output. The percentage of ripple in a dc power sup­ ply is defined as the ratio of the nns value of the ac compon ents in the supply's  voltage to the dc value of the voltage  100% I (3-1)  where Vac .rTD. is the nns value of the ac comp onents of the output voltage and Voc  is the dc comp onent of voltage in the output. Th e smaller the ripple factor in a  power supply, the sm oother the resulting dc waveform.  Th e dc compon ent of the output voltage Voc is quite easy to calcu
late, si nce  it isjust the average of the output voltage of the rectifier:  (3-2)  Th e rm s value of the ac part of the output voltage is harder to calculate, though,  since the dc component of the voltage mu st be subtracted first. H oweve r, the ripple  factor r can be calculated from a different but equivalent formula which does not  require the rm s value of the ac compon ent of the voltage. This formula for ripple is  I, ~ J(%::f -1 x 100% 1 (3-3)  where VlDl• is the nns value of the tota
l output voltage from the rectifier and Voc is  the dc or average output voltage from the rectifier.  In the follow ing discussion of rectifier circuits, the input ac frequency is as­ sumed to be 60 H z.  The Half-Wave Rectifier  A half-wave rectifier is show n in Figure 3-16a, and its output is show n in Figure  3-J6b. TIle diode conducts on the positive half-cycle and blocks current flow on  164 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (a)  ~--~----~----~---.-- '  \ I  \ I  \ I  \_,  ,b,  \ I  \ I  
\ I  '-'  FIGURE 3-16  (a) A luIf-wave rectifier ci['(;uit.  (b) The output voltage of the  rectifier ci['(;uit.  the negative half-cycle. A simple half-wave rectifier of this sort is an extremely  poor approximation to a constant dc waveform - it contains ac frequency compo­ nents at 60 H z and all its hamlOnics. A half-wave rectifier such as the one shown  has a ripple factor r = 121 percent, which m eans it has more ac voltage compo­ nents in its output than dc voltage comp onents. Clearly, t
he half-wave rectifier is  a very poor way to produce a dc voltage from an ac source.  Exa m ple 3-1. Calculate the ripple factor for the half-wave rectifier shown in Fig­ ure 3- 16, both analytically and using MAT LAB.  Solutioll  In Figure 3- 16, the ac source voltage is vjt) = VM sin wtvolts. The output voltage of the  rectifier is  O<wt<Tr  Tr S wts2Tr  80th the average voltage and the rms voltage must be calculated in order to calculate the  ripple factor analytically. The average voltage o
ut of the rectifier is  W f". =2TrO VMsinwtdt  = ~ - ....!!! cos wt ( ~ )1"·  2Tr W 0  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O NICS 165  =  Th e nns value of the total voltage out of the rectifier is  =  cos2wt d 2 t  = vMJ(f;t -f,;Sin 2wt)I:/~  = vMJ(± -8~ sin 2 7T) - (0 - 8~ sin o)  VM = 2  Th erefore, the ripple factor of this rectifier circuit is  I ,- 121 % I  Th e ripple factor can be calculated w ith MATLAB by implem enting the average and  rm s voltage calculations in a MATLAB function, an
d then calculating the ripple from  Equ ation (3-3). Th e first part of the function show n below calculates the average of an in­ put wave fonn, while the second part of the function calculates the nns value of the input  wave form. Finally, the ripple factor is calculated directly from Equ ation (3-3).  func tio n r = ripp le (wave fo rm )  % Fun c tio n t o calc ula t e the ripp le o n a n inp ut wave fo rm.  % Ca lc ula t e the aver age va lue o f the wave fo rm  nva l s = s ize (wave fo rm 
,2);  t em p = 0;  f o r ii = l:nva l s  t em p = t em p + wave fo rm (ii);  e o d  aver age = t em p /nva l s;  % Ca lc ula t e rm s va lue o f wave fo rm  t em p = 0;  166 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  fo r ii = l:nv a ls  tem p = te mp + wave fo rm (ii)A 2;  en d  rm s = sqrt (tem p /nva ls) ;  ~ Ca lc ula te ripp le facto r  r = sqrt((rm s / average )A 2 - 1 ) * 1 00 ;  FlUlction ripp le can be tested by wr iting an m -file to create a half-wave rectified wave­ fonn and supply that 
wave fonn to the function. Th e appropriate M -file is show n below :  ~ M-file: test_ ha lfwave .m  ~ M-file to calc ula te the ripp le o n the o utput o f a h alf-wave  ~ wave rectifie r.  ~ First , gene ra te the o utput o f a ha lf-wave rectifie r  wave fo rm = ze ros(1 ,1 28 );  fo r ii = 1 :1 28  wave fo rm (ii) = ha lfwave (ii*p i /64 );  en d  ~ Now calc ula te the ripp le fa c to r  r = ripp le (wave fo rm );  ~ Print o ut the result  string = ['The ripp le is ' num 2str(r ) '% .'];  d 
isp(string ) ;  Th e output of the half-wave rectifier is simulated by flUlction h a l fwave .  functio n vo lts = ha lfwave(w t )  ~ Fun ctio n t o s imula te the o utput o f a ha lf-wave rectifie r.  ~ w t = Ph ase in radia n s (=o m ega x time)  ~ Co nvert input to the ra nge 0 < = w t < 2*p i  w hile w t >= 2*p i  "  0  "  2*p i ;  en d  w hile  "  < 0  "  0  " • 2*p i ;  en d  ~ S imula te the o utput o f the h a lf-wave rectifie r  if w t >= 0 & w t < = p i  vo lts = sin(w t );  e lse  vo 
lts = 0 ;  en d  Wh en t est_ h a l fwave is executed, the results are:  ,. test ha1fwave  Th e ripp le is 1 21.1772% .  This answer agrees w ith the analytic solution calculated above.  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 167  Th e Full-Wave R ectifier  A full-wave bridge rectifier circuit is show n in Figure 3- 17a, and its output volt­ age is show n in Figure 3- 17c. In this circuit, diodes D J and D 3 conduct on the  positive half-cycle of the ac input, and diodes D l and D 4 conduct on the 
negative  half-cycle. TIle output voltage from this circuit is smoother than the output volt­ age from the half-wave rectifier, but it still contains ac frequency components at  120 H z and its hannonics. T he ripple factor of a fu II-wave rectifier of this sort is  r = 48.2 percent- it is clearly mu ch better than that of a half-wave circuit.  + vif) "- +  "-- FIGU R E 3-17  D,  D,  ••  "'I  \  \ I  \ I , /  - ,.,  - ,b,  'e'  D,  +  Lo., » ,~'"  D,  D,  vlood(tl  +  Lo"  D,  \  \ I  \ I , /  -
 (a) A full-wave bridge rectifier circuit. (bl The output voltage of the rectifier circuit. (el An  alternative full-wave rectifier circuit using two diodes and a center-tapped transfonner.  168 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  "~  /  vIII) ~-*-+--, r-~7'~"~~+-~'--T-t-+---, \, \, i \  > / > /  / ,-...... / ,_/ ' ...... ./  (a) ,b,  ~-------------------------,  '0'  HGU R E 3-18  (a) A three-phase half-wave rectifier cin:uit. (b) The three-phase input voltages to the rectifier cin:uit.  (c) The
 output voltage of the rectifier cin:uit.  Another possible full-wave rectifier circuit is show n in Figure 3- l7b. In this  circuit, diode D t conducts on the positive half-cycle of the ac input with the cur­ rent returning through the center tap of the transfonner, and diode D l conducts on  the negative half-cycle of the ac input with the current returning through the cen­ ter tap of the transfonner. T he output waveform is identical to the one show n in  Figure 3- 17c.  Th e Thr ee-Phase H a
lf-Wave R ectifier  A three-phase half-wave rectifier is show n in Figure 3-18a. T he effect of having  three diodes with their cathodes connected to a comm on point is that at any in­ stant the diode with the largest voltage applied to it will conduct, and the other  two diodes will be reverse-biased. 1lle three phase voltages applied to the rectifier  circuit are show n in Figure 3- 18b, and the resulting output voltage is show n in  Figure 3- 18c. Notice that the voltage at the output of the 
rectifier at any time is  just the highest of the three input voltages at that m oment.  '" " "I  VB(I)r  Vdt)r  (a)  • 1  Lo'"  (b)  Lood  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 169  ."  _,  ""GU R E3-19  (a) A three-phase full-wave rectifier circuit.  (b) This circuit places the lowes/ of its three  input voltages at its output.  T his output voltage is even sm oother than that of a fuJI-wave bridge recti­ fier circuit. It contains ac voltage compon ents at 180 H z and its harmonics. The  ripple 
factor for a rectifier of this sort is 18.3 percent.  Th e Thr ee-Phase Full-Wave R ectifier  A three-phase full-wave rectifier is shown in Figure 3- 19a. Ba sically, a circuit of  this sort can be divided into two compon ent parts. One part of the circuit looks  just like the three-phase half-wave rectifier in Figure 3-18, and it serves to con­ nect the highest of the three phase voltages at any given instant to the load.  T he other part of the circuit consists of three diodes oriented with th
eir an­ odes connected to the load and their cathodes connected to the supply voltages  (Figure 3- I 9b). T his arrangement connects the lowest of the three supply voltages  to the load at any given time.  T herefore, the three-phase fuJI-wave rectifier at aJl times connects the high­ est of the three voltages to one end of the load and always connects the lowest of  the three voltages to the other end of the load. T he result of such a connection is  shown in Figure 3-20.  170 ELECTR IC MAC HIN
ERY RJNDAMENTALS  v(l)  , ,  I  I  I  I  , , ,  , I  , /  I  /  I  , , , , ,  I  I  I  I  I--------T-------I  (a)  v(l)  \ ,\ ,\ , \ ,\ ,\ ,  \,\,\,\,\,\, \,\,\,\,\,\,  \, \, \, \/ \/ \/  V V V V V V  /\ /\ ,\ /\ /\ ,\  /\ /\ /\ /\ /\ /\  I \ 1 \ 1 \ / \ / \ / \  /\/\/\/\""  1 " " " " " ,  ,  / \ / \ 1 \ / \ / \ 1 \  ~~~ __ ~-L~L-~~ __ L-~~ __ ~-+ __ L- '  I--------T-------I  ,b,  ""GU R E 3-10  (a) The highest and lowest voltages in the three-phase full-wa ve rectifier. (b) The resulting output
  voltage.  TIle output of a three-phase fuJi-wave rectifier is even sm oother than the  output of a three-phase half-wave rectifier. T he lowest ac frequency comp onent  present in it is 360 H z, and the ripple factor is only 4.2 percent.  Filtering R ectifier Output  Th e output of any of these rectifier circuits may be further sm oothed by the use of  low-pass filters to remove m ore of the ac frequency comp onents from the output.  Tw o types of elements are comm only used to sm ooth the rec
tifier's output:  I. Capa citors connected across the lines to sm ooth ac voltage changes  2. Inductors connected in series with the line to sm ooth ac current changes  A comm on filter in rectifier circuits used with ma chines is a single series induc­ tor, or choke. A three-phase fuJi-wave rectifier with a choke filter is shown in Fig­ ure 3-2 1.  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 171  L  ;~ I +\  '.  ~  " ~ '< ~ Lood  - FIGU R E 3-21  A three-phase full-wave bridge circuit with an inductive
 filter for reducing output ripple.  3.3 PU L SE C IRCU ITS  Th e SCRs, GTO thyristors, and TRIACs described in Section 3.1 are turned on by  the application of a pulse of current to their gating circuits. To build power con­ trollers, it is necessary to provide some m ethoo of producing and applying pulses  to the gates of these devices at the proper time to turn them on. (In addition, it is  necessary to provide som e m ethoo of producing and applying negative pulses to  the gates of GTO thyri
stors at the proper time to turn them off.)  Many techniques are available to produce voltage and current pulses. Th ey  may be divided into two broad categories: analog and digital. Analog pulse gen­ eration circuits have been used since the earliest days of solid-state ma chinery  controls. The y typically rely on devices such as PNPN diodes that have voltage­ current characteristics with discrete nonconducting and conducting regions. The  transition from the nonconducting to the conducting re
gion of the device (or vice  versa) is used to generate a voltage and current pulse. Some simple analog pulse  generation circuits are described in this section. Th ese circuits are collectively  know n as relaxation oscillators.  Digital pulse generation circuits are becoming very common in mod ern  solid-state motor drives. Th ey typically contain a microcomputer that executes a  program stored in read-only memory (ROM). The computer progrrun ma y consider  many different inputs in deciding th
e proper time to generate firing pulses. For ex­ amp le, it may considerthe desired speed of the motor, the actual speed of the mo­ tor, the rate at which it is accelerating or decelerating, and any specified voltage or  current limits in detennining the time to generate the firing pulses. Th e inputs that  it considers and the relative weighting applied to those inputs can usually be  changed by setting sw itches on the microcomputer's circuit board, making solid­ state m otor drives with digit
al pulse generation circuits very flexible. A typical dig­ ital pulse generation circuit board from a pulse-width-modulated induction m otor  drive is show n in Figure 3-22. Examples of solid-state ac and dc m otor drives con­ taining such digital firing circuits are described in Chapters 7 and 9, respectively.  Th e production of pulses for triggering SCRs, GTOs, and T RIAC s is one of  the m ost complex aspects of solid-state power control. T he simple analog circuits  172  ELECTRIC MACHINERY 
RJNDAMENTALS  +~ ---,  c  ""GURE 3-23  ""GURE 3-22  A typical digital pulse generation circuit  board  from a pulse-width­ modulated (PWM ) induction motor drive.  (Courtesy  of  MagneTek  Drives  and  Systems.)  A relaxation oscillator ( or  pulse generator) using a PNPN diode.  show n here are examples of only the m ost primitive lypes of pulse-producing cir­ c uit s -m ore advanced ones are beyond  th e scope  of  this book.  A Relaxation Oscillator Using a PNPN Diode  Fi gure  3- 23  show s 
a relaxation oscillator or pulse-generating circuit built with a  PNPN diode.  In  order for this circ uit  to work,  the  following conditions  mu st  be  true:  I.  Th e power supply voltage Voc  mu st exceed V BO  for the PNPN diode.  2.  V od R I  mu st  be  less than  /H  for the PNPN diode.  3. R I  mu st  be  mu ch larger than  R 2 .  When the sw it ch  in  the circuit is first closed, capacitor C  will  charge  through resistor R I with time constant  7"  =  R IC.  As  th e  vo ltage on 
the capacitor  builds up,  it  will eventually exceed  VBO  and the PNPN diode will turn o n.  Once   INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 173  Voc 1--------------- l'o(l)  (b'  l'o(l)  ( "  ""GU R E 3-14  (a) The voltage across the capacitor in the relaxation oscillator. (b) The output voltage of the  relaxation oscillator. (c) The output voltage of the oscillator after R[ is decreased.  the PNPN diode turns on, the capacitor will discharge through it. 1lle discharge  will be very rapid because 
R 2 is very small compa red to R I. Once the capacitor is  discharged, the PN PN diode will turn off, since the steady-state current corning  through R I is less than the current /y of the PN PN diode.  The voltage across the capacitor and the resu Iting output voltage and current  are show n in Figure 3-24a and b, respectively.  Th e timing of these pulses can be changed by varying R I. Suppose that re­ sistor R I is decreased. T hen the capacitor will charge m ore quickly, and the PNPN  diode 
will be triggered sooner. 1lle pulses wi ll thus occur closer together (see  Figure 3-24c).  174 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +~-r---1  iD j +)  SCR vct.tl  iG - R, R  ,-, ..  c c  (a) (b'  +~-r-----,  R  ,------[Q  c  (,'  ""GU R E J-15  (a) Using a pulse generator to directly trigger an SCR. (b) Coupling a pulse generator to an SC R  through a transformer. (c) Connecting a pulse generntor to an SCR through a transistor amplifier to  increase the strength of the pulse.  nlis circuit can b
e used to trigger an SCR directly by removing R 2 and con­ necting the SC R gate lead in its place (see Figure 3-25a). A lternatively, the pulse  circuit can be coupled to the SCR through a transfonner, as show n in Figure  3-25b. If more gate current is needed to drive the SCR or TRIAC , then the pulse  can be amplified by an extra transistor stage, as show n in Figure 3-25c.  1lle sam e basic circuit can also be built by using a DIAC in place of the  PNPN diode (see Figure 3-26). It will funct
ion in exactly the sam e fashion as pre­ viously described.  In general, the quantitative analysis of pulse generation circuits is very com­ plex and beyond the scope of this book. H owever, one simple examp le using a re­ laxation oscillator follows . It may be skipped with no loss of continuity, if desired.  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 175  + ~-----,  R,  .----T--~+  vr:f,t)  FIG U R E 3-26  A relaxation oscillator using a DIAC instead of a PNPN diode.  + ~--,  Voc=120V .------
-,--~+  ) '"'"  FIG U R E 3-27  The relaxation oscillator ofEx ampJe 3-2.  Exa m ple 3-2. Figure 3-27 shows a simple relaxation oscillator using a PNPN  diode. In this circuit,  Voc = 120 V R I = 100 ill  C = I J.tF R 2 = I kO  VBO = 75 V IH = \0 rnA  (a) De lennine the firing frequency of this circuit.  (b) De tennine the firing frequency of this circuit if R I is increased to 150 ill.  Solutioll  (a) Wh en the PN PN diode is turned off, capacitor C charges through resistor R I  w ith a time co
nstant T = R I C, and w hen the PN PN diode turns on, capacitor C  discharges through resistor R2 w ith time constant T = R2C. (A ctually, the dis­ charge rate is controlled by the parallel com bination of R I and R 2, b ul since  R I » R 2' the parallel combin atio n is essentially the sam e as R 2 itself.) From  elem entary circuit theory, the equ ation for the voltage on the capacitor as a  function of time during the charging portion of the cycle is  vc(t) = A + B e-·IR,C  176 ELECTRI C MACH
INERY RJNDAMENTALS  w here A and B are constants depending on the initial conditions in the circuit.  Since vC<O) = 0 V and vC<D<» = Yoc, it is possible to solve for A and B:  A = vc(D<» = Yoc  A + B = vdO) = 0 => B = - Yoc  Th erefore,  (3--4)  Th e time at w hich the capacitor will reach the breakover voltage is found by  solving for time t in Equation (3--4):  (3-5)  In this case,  120V-75V  tl = - (1ookOXI/.!F)ln 120V  = 98ms  Similarly, the equation for the voltage on the capacitor as a flU
lction of time dur­ ing the discharge portion of the cycle turns out to be  vc(t) = VBQe -·,R,C  so the current flow through the PNPN diode becomes  V,a i(t) = --e-tlR,c  R,  (3-6)  (3-7)  If we ignore the continued trickle of current through R ], the time at which i(t)  reaches IH and the PNPN diode turns off is  Therefore, the total period of the relaxation oscillator is  T = tl + tl = 98 m s + 2 m s = lOOm s  and the frequency of the relaxation oscillator is  /=1 = 10Hz T  (b) If R ] is incre
ased to 150 kO , the capacitor charging time becomes  Yoc - ¥ BO  t] = - R IC in V  oc  = -(150 kO )(1 F) I 120 V - 75 V /.! n 120V  = 147 m s  (3-8)  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 177  The capacitor discharging time remains unchanged at  1,/1,  t2 = - RlC ln -V = 2 ms  '0  Therefore, the total period of the relaxation oscillator is  T = t] + t2 = 147m s + 2ms = 149ms  and the frequency of the relaxation oscillator is  1 f= 0.149 s = 6.71 H z  Pulse Synchronization  In ac applications, it 
is imp ortant that the triggering pulse be applied to the con­ trolling SCRs at the sam e point in each ac cycle. TIle way this is nonnally done is  to synchronize the pulse circuit to the ac power line supplying power to the SCRs.  This can easily be accomp lished by makin g the power supply to the triggering cir­ cuit the same as the power supply to the SCRs.  If the triggering circuit is supplied from a half-cycle of the ac power line, the  RC circuit will always begin to charge at exactly th
e beginning of the cycle, so the  pulse wi ll always occur at a fIXed time with respect to the beginning of the cycle.  Pulse synchronization in three-phase circuits and inverters is mu ch m ore  complex and is beyond the scope of this book.  3.4 VOLTAGE VARIATION BY  AC PHASE CONTROL  Th e level of voltage applied to a m otor is one of the mo st common variables in  m otor-control applications. Th e SCR and the TRIAC provide a convenient tech­ nique for controlling the average voltage applied t
o a load by changing the phase  angle at which the source voltage is app lied to it.  AC Phase Control for a DC Load Driven from an  AC Source  Figure 3-28 illustrates the concept of phase angle power control. Th e figure  shows a voltage-phase-control circuit with a resistive dc load supplied by an ac  source. TIle SCR in the circuit has a breakover voltage for iG = 0 A that is greater  than the highest voltage in the circuit, while the PNPN diode has a very low  breakover voltage, perhaps 10 V
 or so. Th e full-wave bridge circuit ensures that  the voltage applied to the SCR and the load will always be dc.  If the switch SI in the picture is open, then the voltage VI at the tenninals of  the rectifier will just be a full-wave rectified version of the input voltage (see Fig­ ure 3-29).  If sw itch SI is shut but sw itch S2 is left open, then the SCR will always be  off. TIlis is true because the voltage out of the rectifier will never exceed VBO for  178 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTA
LS  s,  S,  1.0'"  +  ) ,~  +  vit) "-- R +  + 'D  (,p,  ;,  -+  vc(t) C  ""GURE 3-18  A circuit controlling the voltage to a dc load by phase angle control.  ""GU R E 3-29  The voltage at the output of the  bridge circuit with switch S[ open.  the SCR. Since the SCR is always an open circuit, the current through it and the  load, and hence the voltage on the load, will still be zero.  N ow suppose that sw itch S2 is closed.1llen, at the beginning of the first half­ cycle after the sw itch is cl
osed, a voltage builds up across the RC network, and the  capacitor begins to charge. During the time the capacitor is charging, the SCR is  off, since the voltage applied to it has not exceeded VBO ' As time passes, the ca­ pacitor charges up to the breakover voltage of the PNPN diode, and the PNPN  diode conducts. 1lle current flow from the capacitor and the PNPN diode flows  through the gate of the SCR, lowe ring VBO for the SCR and turning it on. Wh en the  SCR turns on, current flows throug
h it and the 10ad.1llis current flow continues for  the rest of the half-cycle, even after the capacitor has discharged, since the SCR  turns off only when its current falls below the holding current (since IH is a few  milliamperes, this does not occur until the extreme end of the half-cycle).  At the beginning of the next half-cycle, the SCR is again off. T he RC circuit  again charges up over a finite period and triggers the PNPN diode. The PNPN  diode once m ore sends a current to the gate o
f the SCR, turning it on. Once on, the  SCR remains on for the rest of the cycle again. T he voltage and current wave­ form s for this circuit are shown in Figure 3-30.  Now for the critical question: H ow can the power supplied to this load be  changed? Suppose the value of R is decreased. T hen at the beginning of each half- I  I  ,  I  ,  \  PNPN diode fires  \  \  I  I  ,  I  ,  \  \  \  I  I  ,  I  ,  \  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 179  \  \  FIGU R E 3-30  Th e voltages across the 
capacitor.  SCR. and load. and the current  f---'L--''---"---'-...L--'----t through the load. when switches  51 and 51 are closed.  fo'lGUR E 3-31  The effect of decreasing R on the  output voltage applied to the load in  the cin:uit of Figure 3-28.  cycle, the capacitor will charge more quickly, and the SCR will fire sooner. Since  the SCR will be on for longer in the half-cycle, more power w ill be supplied to the  load (see Figure 3-3 1). T he resistor R in this circuit controls the power flo
w to the  load in the circuit.  T he power supplied to the load is a function of the time that the SCR fires;  the earlier that it fires, the more power will be supplied. T he firing time of the  SCR is customarily expressed as a firing angle, where the firing angle is the angle  of the applied sinusoidal voltage at the time of firing. T he relationship between  the firing angle and the supplied power wi ll be derived in Example 3-3.  180 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Lo'" R  .... (1)  c  ", 
 ,b,  ""GURE 3-32  (a) A circuit controlling the ... oltage to an ac load by phase angle control. (b) Voltages on the source,  the load, and the SCR in this controller.  AC Phase Angle Control for an AC Load  II is possible to modify the circuit in Figure 3-28 to control an ac load simply by  movin g the load from the dc side of the circuit to a point before the rectifiers. The  resulting circuit is show n in Figure 3-32a, and its voltage and circuit wavefonns  are shown in Figure 3-32b.  H owev
er, there is a mu ch easier way to make an ac power controller. If the  same basic circuit is used with a DIAC in place of the PNPN diode and a TRIAC  in place of the SCR, then the diode bridge circuit can be completely taken out of  the circuit. Because both the DIAC and the TRIAC are two-way devices, they op- ;~  -+ Lo'"  /-Y.  ,n  DIAC  = = C  - ;~ +  -+ Lo'"  ," l~  circuit  INTR O DU CT IO N TO PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 181  - - +  - - /  tD  ) TRIAC  FIGURE 3-33  An ac phase angle controller u
sing  a DIAC and lRIAC.  FIG U R E 3-34  An ac phase angle controller using a TR IAC  triggered by a digital pulse circuit.  erate equally we ll on either half-cycle of the ac source. A n ac phase powe r con­ troller w ith a DIAC and a TRI AC is show n in Figure 3-33.  Exa m ple 3-3. Figure 3-34 shows an ac phase angle controller supplying powe r to  a resistive load. The circuit uses a TRIA C triggered by a digital pulse circuit that can pro­ vide firing pulses at any point in each half-cycle o
f the applied voltage vit). A ssum e that  the supply voltage is 120 V nns at 60 H z.  (a) D etermin e the rms voltage applied to the load as a function of the firing angle of  the pulse circuit. and plot the relationship betwee n firing angle and the supplied  voltage.  (b) Wh at firing angle wo uld be required to supply a voltage of 75 V rms to the load?  Solutioll  (a) This problem is ideally suited to solution using MAT LAB because it involves a  repetitive calculation of the rms voltage app
lied to the load at many different fir­ ing angles. We will solve the problem by calculating the wave form produced by  firing the TRIA C at each angle from 1 0  to 179 0 • and calculating the rm s voltage  of the resulting wave form. (N ote that only the positive half cycle is considered.  since the negative half cycle is symm etrical.)  Th e first step in the solution process is to produce a MAT LAB function  that mimi cs the load voltage for any given w t and firing angle. Fun ction  182 ELEC
TRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  ac_ p h ase_ contro lle r does this. It accepts two input argum ents, a nor­ m alized time wt in radians and a firing angle in degrees. If the time w t is earlier  than the firing angle, the load voltage at that time will be 0 V. If the time w t is  after the firing angle, the load voltage w ill be the sam e as the source voltage for  that time.  func tio n vo lts = ac_ph ase_contro lle r (wt ,deg)  % Fun c tio n t o s imula t e the outp ut o f the positive h a
 lf  % cycl e o f a n ac p h ase a n g l e contro lle r w ith a peak  % vo ltage o f 1 2 0 .. SQR T (2 ) = 1 70 V.  % w t = Ph ase in radia n s (=o m ega x time)  % deg = Firing a n g l e in deg r ees  % D egr ees to radia n s conver s i o n f act o r  deg2 rad = p i / 1 80 ;  % S imula t e the o utp ut o f the p h ase a ng l e contro lle r.  if w t > deg .. deg2 rad;  vo lts = 1 70 .. s in(w t );  e l se  vo lts = 0;  on d  Th e next step is to write an m-file that creates the load wave form fo
r each pos­ sible firing angle, and calculates and plots the resulting nns voltage. The m -file  show n below uses ftmction aC....Jlh ase_ con tro lle r to calculate the load  voltage wave form for each firing angle, and then calculates the nns voltage of  that wave form.  % M-fi1 e, vo1ts_vs-ph ase_ a n g l e .m  % M-fi1 e t o cal cula t e the rm s vo ltage app lied t o a load as  % a func tio n o f the p h ase a n g le firing c irc uit, a n d t o  % p l o t the r esulting r e l a tio n ship . 
 % L oop ove r a ll firing a n g les (1 t o 179 deg r ees)  deg = zer os(1 ,1 79 ) ;  rm s = zer os(1 ,1 79 ) ;  fo r ii = 1 ,1 79  ond  % Save firing a n g l e  deg (ii) = ii;  % Firs t , gen e ra t e the wave f o rm t o a n a lyze .  wave fo rm = z e ros (1 ,1 80);  fo r jj = 1 ,1 80  wave fo rm (j j) = ac-ph as e_co ntro11 e r (j j "pi / 1 8 0, ii) ;  en d  % Now cal cula t e the rm s vo ltage o f the wave fo rm  t em p = sum (wave fo rm. " 2 ) ;  rm s (ii) = sqrt (t em p /1 80) ;  180  160  
140  120  • 100  ~ 80  60  40  20  00  180  160  140  120  • 100  ~ 80  60  40  20  o o  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 183  % P lo t rm s vo l tage o f the l oad as a func t i o n o f f i r in g a ng le  p lo t (deg, rm s);  t i t l e('L oad Vo ltage vs . Fir ing A n g l e ');  x label ('Fir ing a ng le (deg ) ');  y label ('RM S vo ltage (V) ');  g rid o n ;  T wo exampl es of the wave form generated by this function are show n in  Figure 3-35.  0.'  0.'  Load ,·ol!aJ!e for a 45° 
firinJ! anJ!le  V  /  1.0  1.0  1.5 2.0  w i (radians)  (a)  ----- 1.5 2.0  WI (radians)  ,b,  \  \  \  1\  2.5 3.0  \  \  \  1\  2.5 3.0  3.5  3.5  FIGU R E 3-35  W aveform produced by vo l t s_ vs...Jlh ase_ a n g 1 e for a firing angle of (a) 45°; (b) 90°.  184 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  140  120  ~  100  ~ 80  ~ 60 ~  • " 40  20  ------ '" "- "- " w ~ ro 80 100 120 140 lro IW  Firing angle (deg)  ""GU R E 3-36  Plot of rms load voltage versus TR IAC firing angle.  When this m-fIle is
 executed, the plot shown in Figure 3-36 results. Note  that the earlier the firing angle, the greater the rm s voltage supplied to the load.  H owever, the relationship between firing angle and the resulting voltage is not  linear, so it is not easy to predict the required firing angle to achieve a given load  voltage.  (b) The firing angle required to supply 75 V to the load can be fOlUld from Figure  3-36. It is about 99°.  Th e Effect of Inductive L oads on Phase  A ngle Co ntrol  I f the lo
ad attached to a phase angle controller is inductive (as real ma chines are),  then new complications are introduced to the operation of the controller. By the  nature of inductance, the current in an inductive load cannot change instanta­ neously. nlis mean s that the current to the load will not rise imm ediately on firing  the SCR (or TRIA C) and that the current will not stop flow ing at exactly the end  of the half-cycle. At the end of the half-cycle, the inductive voltage on the load  will
 keep the device turned on for som e time into the next half-cycle, until the cur­ rent flow ing through the load and the SCR finally falls below ly. Fig ure 3-37  shows the effect of this delay in the voltage and current wavefonns for the circuit  in Fig ure 3-32.  A large inductance in the load can cause tw o potentially serio us problem s  with a phase controller:  I. T he inductance can cause the current buildup to be so slow when the SCR is  sw itched on that it does not exceed the holding 
current before the gate current  disappears. If this happen s, the SCR will not remain on, because its current is  less than [y.  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 185  , , ,  , , ,  / /  / /  / /  /  /  /  F IGU R E 3-37  \  \  , , ,  \  \  \ ,  \ ,  , , ,  /  /  Th e elTect of an inductive load on the current and voltage waveforms of the cin:uit shown in  Figure 3-32.  2. If the current continues long enough before decaying to IH after the end of a  given cycle, the applied voltage could bui
ld up high enough in the next cycle  to keep the current going, and the SCR wi II never switch off.  Th e nonnal solution to the first problem is to use a special circuit to provide  a longer gating current pulse to the SCR. nlis longer pulse allows plenty oftirne  186 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Freewheeling diod  ~---r--;='I"d"t:::;"i" I)  R2 load  SCR  c  R,  ""GURE 3-38  A phase angle controller illustrating the use of a free-wheeling diode with an inductive load.  for the current throu
gh the SCR to rise above IH, pennitting the device to remain  on for the rest of the half-cycle.  A solution to the second problem is to add afree-wheeling diode. A free­ wheeling diode is a diode placed across a load and oriented so that it does not con­ duct during nonnal current flow . Such a diode is show n in Figure 3-38. At the end  ofa half-cycle, the current in the inductive load will attempt to kccp flow ing in the  same direction as it was going. A voltage will be built up on the load 
with the po­ larity required to keep the current flowing. This voltage will forward-bias the free­ wheeling diode, and it will supply a path for the discharge current from the load.  In that mann er, the SCR can turn off without requiring the current of the inductor  to instantly drop to zero.  3.5 DC-TO-DC POWER CONTROL­ CHOPPERS  Sometimes it is desirable to vary the voltage available from a dc source before ap­ plying it to a load. TIle circuits which vary the voltage of a dc source are calle
d de­ to-de conveners or choppers. In a chopper circuit, the input voltage is a constant  dc voltage source, and the output voltage is varied by varying thefmerion of the  time that the dc source is connected to its load. Figure 3-39 shows the basic prin­ ciple of a chopper circuit. Wh en the SCR is triggered, it turns on and power is sup­ plied to the load. When it turns off, the dc source is disconnected from the load.  In the circuit show n in Figure 3-39, the load is a resistor, and the volt
age on  the load is either Voc or O. Similarly, the current in the load is either VoclR or O. lt  is possible to smooth out the load voltage and current by adding a series inductor  to filter out som e of the ac comp onents in the waveform. Figure 3-40 show s a  chopper circuit with an inductive filter. Th e current through the inductor increases  exponentially when the SCR is on and decreases exponentially when the SCR is  off. If the inductor is large, the time constant of the current changes 
(T = LIR ) will  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 187  SCR  +  L~ +  Voc  ,~ ( R~  ,,'  Voc  ,b,  ,,'  FIGU R E 3-39  (a) The basic principte of a chopper circuit. (b) The input voltage to the circuit. (c) The resulting  voltage on the load.  be long relati ve to the on/off cycle of the SCR and the load voltage and current  will be almost constant at some average value.  In the case of ac phase controllers, the SCRs automatically turn off at the end  of each half-cycle when their currents go 
to 7..ero. For dc circuits, there is no point  at which the current naturally falls below IH, so once an SCR is turned on, it never  turns off. To turn the SCR off again at the end of a pulse, it is necessary to apply a  reverse voltage to it for a short time. TIlis reverse voltage stops the current flow and  turns off the SCR. On ce it is off, it will not turn on again until another pulse enters  the gate of the SCR. TIle process of forcing an SCR to turn off at a desired time is  known as forc
ed commutation.  GTO thyristors are ideally suited for use in chopper circuits, since they are  self-commutating. In contrast to SCRs, GTO s can be turned off by a negative cur­ rent pulse applied to their gates. T herefore, the extra circuitry needed in an SCR  188 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  SCR  +  "j I ;~ + L +  Voc vI(t)  ,~( D, R~  ,,'  Voc e------------------------------ "------------------------------, ,b,  , ---vI(t)  , --- ---vlood(l)  -- --- -\ - \ - \ , / , / , /  / / / , , , 
 " ,  ""GU R E 3-40  A chopper circuit with an inductive filter 10 smooth oUllhe load voltage and current.  chopper circuit to turn off the SCR can be eliminated from a G T O thyristor chop­ per circuit (Figure 3---41 a). Powe r transistors are also self-commutating and are  used in chopper circuits that fall within their power limits (Figure 3---41 b).  Chopper circuits are used with dc power system s to vary the speed of dc  m otors. TIleir greatest advantage for dc speed control compa red to 
conventional  method s is that they are more efficient than the system s (such as the Ward­ Le onard system described in Chapter 6) that they replace.  Forced Co mmut ation in C hopper C ircuits  Wh en SCRs are used in choppers, a forced-commutation circuit mu st be included  to turn off the SCRs at the desired time. Most such forced-commutation circuits  +  VOC  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 189  L  Lo ,d  ;~ Voc  - I, I  + }~ ;J  Lood  I  ;,  f/ - "  (a) (b'  FIGU R E 3-41  (a) A
 chopper cin:uit made with a G T O thyristor. (b) A chopper cin:uit made with a transistor.  +c ~----------------------,  I  D  \  FIGU R E 3-42  I  SC R  ~-T  +,---f--,  R  L  - '--+---'  A series-capacitor forced-commutation chopper cin:uit.  Lo ,d  +  depend for their turnoff voltage on a charged capacitor. Two basic versions of ca­ pacitor commut ation are examined in this brief overview:  I. Series-capacitor commut ation circuits  2. Parallel-capacitor commul alion circuits  Series-C apacit
or Co mmutati on C ircuits  Figure 3-42 shows a simple dc chopper circuit with series-capacitor commut a­ lion. Ii consists of an SC R , a capacitor, and a load, all in series w ith each other.  190 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Voc -------- Discharge 1" '" RC  L--1 ______ ~~ ______ ~ ________ ,  Voc ----------------------------- ""GURE 3-43  The capacitor and load voltages in the series chopper circuit.  TIle capacitor has a shunt discharging resistor across it, and the load has a free­ wh
eeling diode across it.  TIle SCR is initially turned on by a pulse applied to its gate. When the SCR  turns on, a voltage is applied to the load and a current starts flowing through it.  But this current flows through the series capacitor on the way to the load, and the  capacitor gradually charges up. Wh en the capacitor's voltage nearly reaches V oc.  the current through the SCR drops below iH and the SCR turns off.  Once the capacitor has turned off the SCR, it gradually discharges through  
resistor R. Wh en it is totally discharged, the SCR is ready to be fired by another  pulse at its gate. Th e voltage and current wavefonns for this circuit are show n in  Figure 3-43.  Unfortunately, this type of circuit is limited in tenns of duty cycle, since the  SCR cannot be fired again until the capacitor has discharged. Th e discharge time  depends on the time constant 1" = RC , and C mu st be mad e large in order to let a  lot of current flow to the load before it turns off the SCR. But 
R mu st be large,  since the current leaking through the resistor has to be less than the holding cur­ rent of the SCR. Th ese two facts taken together mean that the SCR cannot be re­ fired quickly after it turns off. It has a long recovery time.  An improved series-capacitor commutation circuit with a shortened recov­ ery time is show n in Figure 3-44. TIlis circuit is similar to the previous one except  that the resistor has been replaced by an inductor and SCR in series. Wh en SCR is  fired, 
current will flow to the load and the capacitor will charge up, cutting off  SCRI. Once it is cut off, SCR 2 can be fired, discharging the capacitor mu ch more  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 191  ;" [  n n n ,  ;" [  n n n , i  i!l SCR I  vc(l)  i!2  L +  co ~ vc(l)  - SCR, ~  - +  Inductive D  load  I  ~~-~-~. =-!--~~--~- ,  Ready  '"  - fire  (a)  (bj  FIGU R E 3-44  (a) A series-capacitor forced-commutation chopper cin:uit with improved capacitor recovery time.  (b) The resulting capaci
tor and load voltage waveforms. Note that the capacitor discharges much  more rapidly, so SCR[ could be refired sooner than before.  quickly than the resistor would. TIle inductor in series with SCR 1 protects SCR 1  from instantaneous current surges that exceed its ratings. Once the capacitor dis­ charges, SCR 1 turns off and SCR] is ready to fire again.  P arallel-C apa citor Co mmut ation C ircuits  T he other common way to achieve forced commutation is via the parallel­ capacitor commutation
 scheme. A simple example of the parallel-capacitor  schem e is show n in Figure 3-45. In this schem e, SCR] is the main SCR, supply­ ing power to the load, and SCR 2 controls the operation of the commutating capac­ itor. To apply power to the load, SCR I is fired. When this occurs, a current flows  through the SCR to the load, supplying power to it. Also, capacitor C charges up  through resistor R to a voltage equal to the supply voltage Voc.  When the time come s to turn off the power to the l
oad, SCR 2 is fired. Wh en  SCR 1 is fired, the voltage across it drops to zero. Since the voltage across a  192 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  •  R \  D ,~  v OC L  " - - C.  SCR]  ~ ~  ""GU R E 3-45  A parallel-<:apacitor forced-commuta.tion chopper circuit .  •  R \  L  D ,~  L oc I o---J  v  _ Vc +  "  SC R ]  ~ ~  ""GU R E 3-46  A parallel-<:apacitor forced-commuta.tion chopper circuit with improved capacitor charging time.  SCR J permits the load power to be turned off more quickly tha
D it could be with the basic parallel­ capacitor circu it.  capacitor cannot change instantaneously, the voltage on the left side of the capaci­ tor mu st instantly drop to -Voc volts. This turns off SCRb and the capacitor  charges through the load and SCR 2 to a vol tage of Voc volts positive on its left side.  Once capacitor C is charged, SCR l turns off, and the cycle is ready to begin again.  Again, resistor R ] mu st be large in order for the current through it to be less  than the holding 
current of SCR 2 . But a large resistor R t m eans that the capacitor  will charge only slow ly after SC R ] fires. This limits how soon SCR] can be turned  off after it fires, setting a lowe r limit on the on time of the chopped waveform.  A circuit with a reduced capacitor charging time is show n in Figure 3-46. In  this circuit SCR 1 is triggered at the same time as SC R ] is, and the capacitor can  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 193  charge mu ch m ore rapidly. This allows the current t
o be turned off mu ch m ore  rapidly if it is desired to do so.  In any circuit of this sort, the free-wheeling diode is extremely important.  Wh en SCR[ is forced off, the current through the inductive load must have an­ other path available to it, or it could possibly damage the SCR.  3.6 INVERTERS  Perhaps the mo st rapidly grow ing area in mod ern power electronics is static fre­ quency conversion, the conversion of ac power at one frequency to ac power at  another frequency by m eans of sol
id-state electronics. Traditionally there have  been two approaches to static ac frequency conversion: the cycloconverter and the  rectifier-inverter. Th e cycJoconverter is a device for directly converting ac power  at one frequency to ac powe r at another frequency, while the rectifier-inverter first  converts ac power to dc power and then converts the dc power to ac power again  at a different frequency. lllis section deals with the operation of rectifier-inverter  circuits, and Section 3.7 d
eals with the cycJoconverter.  A rectifier-inverter is divided into two parts:  I. A rectifier to produce dc power  2. An inveT1er to produce ac power from the dc power.  Each part is treated separately.  The Rectifier  Th e basic rectifier circuits for converting ac power to dc power are described in  Section 3.2. Th ese circuits have one problem from a m otor-control point of  view-their output voltage is fixed for a given input voltage. This problem can be  overcome by replacing the diodes in
 these circuits with SCRs.  Figure 3-47 shows a three-phase full-wave rectifier circuit with the diodes  in the circuits replaced by SCRs. The average dc output voltage from this circuit  depends on when the SCRs are triggered during their positive half-cycles. If they  are triggered at the beginning of the half-cycle, this circuit will be the sam e as that  of a three-phase full-wave rectifier with diodes. Ifthe SCRs are never triggered,  the output voltage wi ll be 0 V. For any other firing an
gle between 0° and 180 0  on  the wavefonn, the dc output voltage will be somewher e between the maximum  value and 0 V.  Wh en SCRs are used instead of diodes in the rectifier circuit to get control  of the dc voltage output, this output voltage wi ll have m ore harmonic content than  a simple rectifier would, and some fonn of filter on its output is imp ortant. Figure  3-47 show s an inductor and capacitor filter placed at the output of the rectifier to  help smooth the dc output.  194 ELECTR 
IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  • L  , , -,  vB<t) vc<t) c  , , -,  ""GU R E 3-47  A three-phase rectifier circuit using SCRs to provide control of the dc output voltage level.  L, I, J - "-'  S~ SCR 2 SCR 1 ;C  C·l r{  '-'I R ectifier  Synchronous motor  SCR 4 <>-'-'  SCR~  o-C-J  SCR 6 o-C-J  ""GU R E 3-48  An external commutation inverter.  Ex ternal Co mmut ation Inverters  Inverters are classified into two basic types by the commutation technique used:  external commutation and self-commutation
. Extenwl commutation inverters are  inverters in which the energy required to turn off the SCRs is provided by an ex­ ternal m otor or power supply. An example of an external commutation inverter is  show n in Figure 3-48. T he inverter is connected to a three-phase synchronous  motor, which provides the countervoltage necessary to turn off one SCR when its  companion is fired.  llle SCRs in this circuit are triggered in the follow ing order: SCRj, SC~,  SCR 2, SCR 4, SCR 1, SCR 5. When SCR t f
ires, the internal generated voltage in the  synchronous m otor provides the voltage necessary to turn off SCR J. N ote that if  the load were not connected to the inverter, the SCRs would never be turned off  and after ~ cycle a short circuit would develop through SCR t and SC~.  lllis inverter is also called a load-commutated inverter.  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 195  Self-Commutation Inverters  Ifit is not possible to guarantee that a load will always provide the proper coun­ tervolt
age for commutation, then a self-commutation inverter mu st be used. A  self-commutation inverter is an inverter in which the active SCRs are turned off  by energy stored in a capacitor when another SCR is sw itched on. It is also possi­ ble to design self-commutation inverters using GTO s or power transistors, in  which case commutation capacitors are not required.  Th ere are three m~or types of self-commutation inverters: current source in­ verters (CS ls), voltage source inverters (VSls), an
d pulse-width modulation  (PWM ) inverters. Current source inverters and voltage source inverters are simpler  than PWM inverters and have been used for a longer time. PWM inverters require  m ore complex control circuitry and faster sw itching compon ents than CS ls and  VS ls. CS ls and VS ls are discussed first. Current source inverters and voltage  source inverters are compared in Figure 3-49.  In the current source inverter, a rectifier is connected to an inverter through  a large series in
ductor Ls. The inductance of Ls is sufficiently large that the direct  current is constrained to be almost constant. TIle SCR current output waveform  will be roughly a square wave, since the current flow Is is constrained to be nearly  constant. Th e line-to-Iine voltage will be approximately triangular. It is easy to  limit overcurrent conditions in this design, but the output voltage can sw ing  widely in response to changes in load.  In the voltage source inverter, a rectifier is connected t
o an inverter through  a series inductor Ls and a parallel capacitor C. The capacitance of C is sufficiently  large that the voltage is constrained to be almost constant. The SCR line-to-line  voltage output wavefonn will be roughly a square wave, since the voltage Vc is  constrained to be nearly constant. TIle output current now wi ll be approximately  triangular. Voltage variations are small in this circuit, but currents can vary wildly  with variations in load, and overcurrent protection is d
ifficult to implement.  TIle frequency of both current and voltage source inverters can be easily  changed by changing the firing pulses on the gates of the SCRs, so both inverters  can be used to drive ac m otors at variable speeds (see Chapter 10).  A Single-Phase Current Source Inverter  A single-phase current source inverter circuit with capacitor commutation is  show n in Figure 3-50. It contains two SCRs, a capacitor, and an output trans­ former. To understand the operation of this circuit
, assum e initially that both SCRs  are off. If SCR[ is now turned on by a gate current, voltage Voc will be applied to  the upper half of the transfonner in the circuit. This voltage induces a voltage Voc  in the lower half of the transfonner as well, causing a voltage of 2 Voc to be built  up across the capacitor. Th e voltages and currents in the circuit at this time are  shown in Figure 3-50b.  N ow SCR l is turned on. Wh en SCR 2 is turned on, the voltage at the cathode  of the SCR will be 
Voc. Since the voltage across a capacitor cannot change  196 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Current source invener Voltage source invener  L, I, L,  -I I r + I  M ain circuit  ~ ~ ~  y,( f--o  configuration ~ ~ ~ c f--o  ~ ~ ~  f--o  I I I  - I  R ectifier Inverter Re ctifier Inverter  T ype of source Current source -Is almost constant Voltage source -Vs almost constam  Output impedance H igh Low  Line /"""-.. . , ',' Vi r- Line  voltage / voltage  lO'\J"ilf a If 21f  (1800 conduction) Outp
ut waveform  =t1  ,  CUrrent OJ /tv  Currem  (1200 conduction)  I. Easy to control overcurrent I. Difficult to limit current  Characteristics conditions with this design because of capacitor  2. Output voltage varies widely 2. Output voltage variations  with changes in load small because of capacitor  ""GU R E 3-49  Comparison of current source inveners and voltage source inverters.  instantaneously, this forces the voltage at the top of the capacitor to instantly be­ com e 3 Voc, turning off SC
R t. At this point, the voltage on the bottom half of the  transfonner is built up positive at the bottom to negative at the top of the winding,  and its ma gnitude is Voc. Th e voltage in the bottom half induces a voltage Voc in  the upper half of the transformer, charging the capacitor C up to a voltage of 2V oc,  oriented positive at the bottom with respect to the top of the capacitor. Th e condi­ tion of the circuit at this time is show n in Figure 3-5Oc.  When SCR] is fired again, the capac
itor voltage cuts off SCR 2 , and this  process repeats indefinitely. The resulting voltage and current wavefonns are  show n in Figure 3-5 1.  +  (a)  +  (b'  +  «,  oc  L  '",- ~- FIG U R E 3-50  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 197  + J i...(t)  C  ",  - SC R 2  _4----'  SC R l  - c-' := ;, Voc + +  ;,  if. ;~  Lo,'  •  -• ;~  (a) A simple single-phase inverter circuit. (b) Th e voltages and currems in the circuil when SC R [ is  triggered. (c) The voltages and currents in the circ
uit when SC R 1 is lriggered.  A Th ree-Phase C urrent Source Inverter  Figure 3-52 shows a three-phase current source inverter. In this circuit, the six  SC R s fire in the order SC R ], SC~, SC R 2, SC~, SC R 1, SC R 5. Capac itors C l  through C 6 provide the commut ation required by the SC R s.  198 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  3Voc  SC R 2 turned SC R ] turned  ~ off  ~] I ~  "  2Voc  " I ---- I I I I  I ;  I I  o  - , ----"  vif),  ;,.(1)  2Voc  Voc  o  I  - H G UR E 3-51  I  / 
 ~ ,  SC R 2 turned SC R ] tu  ~ off off  I ~  " I I  I - I I I I  I ;  I I , ----"  ~  I,  I,  I No<  t  ~d  ---"'SCRI cathode  - - - "'SCR 2 cathode  __ v)/)  ---jefl)  Plots of the voltages and current in the inverter circu it: VI is the voltage al the cathode of seR lo and  V1 is the voltage at the cathode of Se R lo Since the voltage at their anodes is Voc. any time VI or V1  exceeds Voc . that SC R is turned off. il.ood is the current supplied to the invener's load.  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER
 ELECTRON ICS 199  Three­ ph~  input  ~  ~  ~  I, I  L,  R ectifier  FIGU R E 3-52  SCR[  ~  D,  D,  SCI<,  ~  A three-phase current source inverter.  SC R 2  ~  C,  " "  D,  D,  C,  " "  SCR~  ~  SCR J  ~  C,  C, D,  0  b f '\  Motor  ,  D,  C,  C,  SCR,;  ~  To understand the operation of this circuit, examine Figure 3-53. Assume  that initially SCR[ and SCR~ are conducting, as show n in Figure 3-53a. T hen a  voltage will build up across capacitors C t, C 3, C 4 , and C s as show n on the dia
­ gram. N ow assume that SC R 6 is gated on. Wh en SC~ is turned on, the voltage at  point 6 drops to zero (see Figure 3-53b). Since the voltage across capacitor C s  cannot change instantaneously, the anode of SCR sis biased negative, and SCRs is  turned off. On ce SC~ is on, all the capacitors charge up as show n in Figure  3-53c, and the circuit is ready to turn off SCR 6 whenever SCR 4 is turned on. T his  same commutation process applies to the upper SCR bank as well.  T he output phase and
 line current from this circuit are show n in Figure 3-53d.  A Three-Phase Vo ltage So urce Inverter  Figure 3-54 shows a three-phase voltage source inverter using power transistors  as the active elements. Since power transistors are self-commutating, no special  commutation comp onents are included in this circuit.  N  Q  Q  Th ree­ p,,",  input - I, I  L,  Rectifier  FlG U R E J-..53  ---.  SC R ]  J  D,  L - D,  SC R 4 J  SC R 2 SC R 3  C, J  + ,;- C, J  "  + - D, C] D3  " - b M otor  I - ./
 c "- D, D.  C, C,  "  ,,~  + "- -" +  " C.  "  SC R,  ~  SCRo  -'  ,,'  T_~  p"'~  input  I, I  L,  Rectifier  SC R ]  J  D,  D,  SC R.,  J  SC R 2 SC R 1  C, J  + ,,'- C, ~  "  + - D,  "  C 1 D3  D, D.  C,  ~,'  + - v~ _11 +  ~,'  "  SC R, SCRo  -' ~  ,b,  "  b M otor  c ./  '.  WhenSC~fires.  "'6 ---+ O. Therefore  the anode voltage of  SCR~ (\'~ ) becomes  negative. and  SCR~ turns off.  1be operation of the three-phase CS I. (3) Initially. SC R I and SC R I are conducting. N ote how the com
mutating capacitocs have charged up. (b) 1be situation when SC~ fires. 1be  voltage at the aoode of SC R 6 falls almost instantaneously to zero. Since the voltage across capacitor C l cannot change instantaneously. the voltage at the anode ofSeR l will become  negative. arxI SC R I will tum off.  Three­ p,,",  input  I, I  L,  Rectifier  ---.  SCR]  J  D,  I  D,  SC R 4 J  N FlGURE 3-S3 (concluded)  - SCR 2 SCR 3  C, J C , -'  + ,,- "  + - D, ~3 D3  D, D.  C, C,  " + "  " C.  + "  SCI<,  ~ J  SC
R,  ..i , "  " - b MOlOr  ,  I - V  Gale pulses  SCR  11 6 2 4 3 S 6  conducting I SCR t SCR 2 SCR J SCR t  nlerva/s  SCI<, SCR, SCR, SCI<, SCR,  ,  -,  '.(1'1 I I ,  I, I  I I -I,  ]1----,--------'---'----,-------,---- "(:~ II------,-----,-------'----'--------,----- -I,  ,d,  8: (c) N ow SCR[ and SC~ are conducting, and the commutating capacitors charge up as shown, (d) The gating pulses, SCR conducting intervals, and the output current from this  invener,  202 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  
+~~  Th~  ph~  invene  ~  ~  ~  R ectifier  - ""GURE 3-54  - ~ +  /V,  T  +  T,  D,  V,  = =C  T,  D,  - ,,'  T,  T,  (a) A three-phase voltage source inverter using power transistors.  T,  D, D,  T.  D, D.  I n this circuit, the transistors are made to conduct in the order Tb T6 , T2, T4 ,  T1, T5. The output phase and line voltage from this circuit are show n in Fig­ ure 3-54b.  Pulse-Width M odulation Inverters  Pulse-width modulation is the process of modifying the width of the pulses in a  
pulse train in direct proportion to a sma ll control signal; the greater the control  voltage, the wider the resulting pulses become. By using a sinusoid of the desired  frequency as the control voltage for a PWM circuit, it is possible to produce a  high-power wavefonn whose average voltage varies sinusoidally in a manner  suitable for driving ac m otors.  1lle basic concepts of pulse-width modulation are illustrated in Figure 3-55.  Figure 3-55a shows a single-phase PWM inverter circuit using 
IGBTs. The states  of IGST t through IGBT 4 in this circuit are controlled by the two comparators  show n in Figure 3-55b.  A comparator is a device that compares the input voltage Vinet) to a refer­ ence signal and turns transistors on or off depending on the results of the test.  Comparator A compares VinCt) to the reference voltage v..(t) and controls IGBTs T t  and Tl based on the results of the comparison. Comparator B compares Vinet) to the  reference voltage v,(t) and controls IGBTs Tl an
d T4 based on the results of the  comparison. If VinCt) is greater than v..(t) at any given time t, then comparator A  will turn on Tt and turn off Tl. Otherwise, it will turn off Tt and turn on T2 . Simi­ larly, if Vinet) is greater than vy(t) at any gi ven time t, then comparator B will turn  b  ,  T,  T,  T,  ,  ,  -v, '-------'  "'c(l) Vs f-----,  -v,  "'w,(/) 2V ,  v ,  o  -v ,  -2V ,  "'bc(1) 2V ,  v ,  o  -v ,  -2V ,  "'c,.(1) 2V ,  v ,  o  -v ,  -2V ,  FIGU R E 3-54 (conclud ed)  INTR O 
DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 203  T, T,  T, T, T,  T. T, T.  L  ,b,  (b) Th e output phase and line voltages from the inverter.  204 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  VBI~ T, VB3~ T  v_(I)  , , + - Lo ,d  + +  VB2~ T, ) 'J" ('in VB4~ T ,  - - (.,  ""GURE J-S5  The basic concepts of pulse-width modulation. (a) A single-phase PWM cin:uil using IGBTs.  off TJ and tum on T4. Otherwise, it will turn on T) and turn off T4 . The reference  voltages vit) and vy(!) are shown in Figure 3-55c.  T
o understand the overall operation of this PWM inverter circuit, see what  happens when different control voltages are applied to it. First, assume that the  control voltage is a v. 1llen voltages vit) and v.(t) are identical, and the load volt­ age out of the circuit V1oad(t) is zero (see Figure 3-56).  N ext, assume that a constant positive control voltage equal to one-half of  the peak reference voltage is applied to the circuit. 1lle resulting output voltage is  a train of pulses with a 50 p
ercent duty cycle, as show n in Figure 3-57.  Finally, assume that a sinusoidal control voltage is applied to the circuit as  show n in Figure 3-58. 1lle width of the resulting pulse train varies sinusoidally  with the control voltage. 1lle result is a high-power output wavefonn whose aver­ age voltage over any small region is directly proportional to the average voltage  of the control signal in that region. 1lle fundamental frequency of the output  waveform is the sam e as the frequency of the
 input control voltage. Of course,  there are hannonic compon ents in the output voltage, but they are not usually a  concern in m otor-control applications. 1lle hannonic components may cause ad­ ditional heating in the motor being driven by the inverter, but the extra heating can  be compen sated for either by buying a specially designed motor or by derating an  ordinary m otor (running it at less than its full rated power).  A complete three-phase PWM inverter would consist of three of the si
ngle­ phase inverters described above with co ntrol voltages consisting of sinusoids  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 205  Comparator A  '" '"  I'in > I'x 0" Off  viI) l'in < I'x Off 0"  Comparator B  '~ '"  I'in > I'y Off 0"  vft) l'in < I'y 0" Off  ,b,  ,,'  FIGU R E 3-55 (col/eluded)  (b) The comparators used to control the on and off states ofttle transistors. (c) The reference voltages  used in the comparators.  shifted by 120 0  between phases. Frequency control in a PWM inverter of th
is sort  is accomplished by changing the frequency of the input control voltage.  A PWM inverter sw itches states many times during a single cycle of the re­ sulting output voltage. At the time ofthis writing, reference voltages with frequen­ cies as high as 12 kH z are used in PWM inverter designs, so the comp onents in a  PWM inverter mu st change states up to 24,(X)Q times per second. T his rapid sw itch­ ing mean s that PWM inverters require faster components than CS ls or YS ls. PWM  invert
ers need high-power high-frequency components such as G TO thyristors,  206 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  • " , , , , , ,  • " , , , , , ,  V.jt)  "'. " , , , , , ,  • " , , , , , ,  • " , , , , , ,  Vio '" 0 f-*--~'----'*--~-~I--*---il--*--lf--*-- , , , , ,  r- r- , , , , , ,  " •  , , , , , ,  " •  , , , , , ,  " •  , , , , , ,  " •  , , , , ,  ,-- ,-- ,  ,  Vmd(l) ",0 r--------------------,  ""GURE 3-56  Th e output of the PWM circuit w ith an input voltage of 0 V. Note that v,(t) '" v,(t)
. so v~t) '" o.  )  , , , ,  ,  " , ,  FIGU RE 3-57  , , , , , ,  " •  ,- , , , , , ,  " •  ,- INTR O DU CT IO N T O POWE R ELECTR O NI CS 207  , , , , , ,  " •  ,- , , , , , ,  " •  , , , , , ,  " •  r  ,  Th e output of the PW M circuit with an input voltage equal to one-half of the peak comparator  voltage.  --- --­<- --- --­<-- <  --- -- 208  -- L  ---. - ;.  -- ---;.  -- ----. -- ----. --- ~  i  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 209  IGBTs, and/or power transistors for proper operation. (
At the time of this writing,  IGBTs have the advantage for high-speed, high-power sw itching, so they are the  preferred compon ent for building PWM inverters.) Th e control voltage fed to the  comparator circuits is usually implemented digitally by m eans of a microcomputer  m ounted on a circuit board within the PWM m otor controller. Th e control voltage  (and therefore the output pulse width) can be controlled by the microcomputer in  a mann er mu ch more sophisticated than that described he
re. It is possible for the  microcomputer to vary the control voltage to achieve different frequencies and  voltage levels in any desired manner. For example, the microcomputer could im­ plem ent various acceleration and deceleration ramps, current limits, and voltage­ versus-frequency curves by simply changing options in software.  A real PWM-bascd induction m otor drive circuit is described in Section 7.10.  3.7 CYCLOCONVERTERS  Th e cyc1oconverter is a device for directly converting ac power 
at one frequency  to ac power at another frequency. Compared to rectifier-inverter scheme s, cyc1o­ converters have man y m ore SCRs and mu ch mor e complex gating circuitry. De­ spite these disadvantages, cyc1oconverters can be less expensive than rectifier­ inverters at higher power ratings.  Cyc1oconverters are now available in constant-frequency and variable­ frequency versions. A constant-frequency cyc1oconverter is used to supply power  at one frequency from a source at another frequency (
e.g., to supply 50-H z loads  from a 6O- H z source). Variable-frequency cyc1oconverters are used to provide a  variable output voltage and frequency from a constant-voltage and constant­ frequency source. Th ey are often used as ac induction motor drives.  Although the details of a cyc1oconverter can become very complex, the ba­ sic idea behind the device is simple. TIle input to a cyc1oconverter is a three-phase  source which consists of three voltages equal in ma gnitude and phase-shifted fro
m  each other by 120°. TIle desired output voltage is som e specified wavefonn, usu­ ally a sinusoid at a different frequency. The cycloconverter generates its desired  output waveform by selecting the combination of the three input phases wh ich  most closely approximates the desired output voltage at each instant of time.  Th ere are two major categories of cycloconverters, noncirculating current  cycloconverters and circulating current cycloconverters. Th ese types are distin­ guished by whet
her or not a current circulates internally within the cyclocon­ verter; they have different characteristics. The two types of cycloconverters are  described follow ing an introduction to basic cycloconverter concepts.  Basic Concepts  A good way to begin the study of cycloconverters is to take a closer look at the  three-phase full-wave bridge rectifier ci rcuit described in Section 3.2. TIlis circuit  is show n in Figure 3-59 attached to a resistive load. In that figure, the diodes are  divided
 into two halves, a positive half and a negative half. In the positive half, the  210 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  D,  D,  VA(I) '" V Msin WI V  VB(I) '" VMsin (ro/-120") V  Vc(l) '" VMsin (&1-240°) V  fo'IGURE 3-59  D, D,  Lo .d  D, D,  +  }~(')  - A three-phase full-wave diode bridge ci['(;uit connec ted to a resistive load.  diode with the highest voltage applied to it at any given time will conduct, and it  will reverse-bias the other two diodes in the section. In the negative half, the 
diode  with the lowes t voltage applied to it at any given time will conduct, and it will  reverse-bias the other two diodes in the section. TIle resulting output voltage is  show n in Figure 3--60.  Now suppose that the six diodes in the bridge circuit are replaced by six  SCRs as show n in Figure 3--61. Assume that initially SCR] is conducting as show n  in Figure 3--61 b. nlis SCR will continue to conduct until the current through it falls  below IH. Ifno other SCR in the positive halfis trig
gered, then SCR[ will be turned  ofT when voltage VA goes to 7..ero and reverses polarity at point 2. H oweve r, if SCR l  is triggered at any time after point I, then SCR[ will be instantly reverse-biased and  turned off. TIle process in which SCR 2 forces SCR[ to turn off is calJed/orced com­ mutation; it can be seen that forced commutation is possible only for the phase an­ gles between points I and 2. 1lle SCRs in the negative half behave in a similar  mann er, as show n in Figure 3--61 c. N
ote that if each of the SCRs is fired as soon as  commutation is possible, then the output of this bridge circuit will be the sam e as  the output of the full-wave diode bridge rectifier show n in Figure 3-59.  Now suppose that it is desired to produce a linearly decreasing output volt­ age with this circuit, as show n in Figure 3--62. To produce such an output, the con­ ducting SCR in the positive half of the bridge circuit mu st be turned off whenever  its voltage falls too far below the desir
ed value. 1llis is done by triggering another  SCR voltage above the desired value. Similarly, the conducting SCR in the nega­ tive half of the bridge circuit mu st be turned ofT whenever its voltage rises too far  above the desired value. B y triggering the SCRs in the positive and negative  halves at the right time, it is possible to produce an output voltage which de­ creases in a manner roughly corresponding to the desired wavefonn. It is obvious  from examining Figure 3--62 that many harmon
ic comp onents are present in the  resulting output voltage.  (,)  (q)  (.)  'Pro1 ;KJ] 0] P"!1ddil "iil'HOA 1C10] ;KU (:l) 's<PpOfP  J111Q-\JAnl1ii"U ;KJ] WOJJ "iiC1IOA mdlnO "IlL (q) 's"POfP JI11Ij-\JAmsod \JI/I UJO.IJ \Jiil1l[OA ]ndlnO \JIlL (e)  09-£ :nm::>1.'1  ,,",' ,,- - ~.... ,,'--..... ,--......... ,,-- ~ ....  /' " /" .... , /" "v" .... , / ',// .... , /"  ~ )- /' X /, < , /~ /' /' /\ /~ I,  ~ /, /' /' I~ I, /~  '/,1' ,/~/,I, '1,1,1 1 \ 1\  \ 1 ,I ,I \1 '/ \1 \  , I ,I ' I \.1 'I vI , 
 Y A v . ~ f ,\  /\ " \ 1/\ / \ / \ / \ /  1\ I, \ 1'1\ 1\ I  1\,1\1 \1 I  " ",,"\', 1'1 \1 ,I  1 'I , 'I ,I " \1  I , 1 '/ 'I 'I ,I ,I  I '( ) I~ I )1 ~  , I 1\ I 1\\ 1\  \ 1\ " /\ II /\ II  \\// '\// \\,/ '\x'/ '\,,/ '\;1// \1\  o , ,  I' /' 1 \ I' I, 1\  1\ , I, I' 1\ I'  f\ I, I~/\ 1,1'  , , , , I\I\I'I\/~/\  I \/1 \./ ',/ \/ ~./ \,  , ,  iiu!I:lnpuOJ ta iiunJnpUOJ 9a l!unJnpUO:l 'a  /.... " /'.  /' /, /, /' " ~ /, '" / ~ I,  I / '. / • / , ~ / 1 t, /r t, /1 ~ , /  / .... 1 '/ ~/  / ,/ '/ ,/
 / ,I / '/  / , " , / ," , .( A /,  .... /, /' /' , / , / , / , , /" .... / ....  ',,-----'\ ',,-----'''\ ',------'''\ '  (/j-J~ (lfI~ (I)V~  ..... ..... --'-, /"....... ",,- -......... ,,- --- ~ .....  ,/ /..." '" / .... / ....". , / ' / ,,/  ,/ ' " " /  /<. X ',,~  / ~, / , / .... / / , / ,  /' / ~ /,  I / '. /, /, / 1 t ( . 1 , ~ , / t / ,/ ,/1 ~  / ,/ '/ , / ' / ;  ;  /  l!unJnpUO:l 'a  \  (lj-J~  , / ' / , ;  ~\  (1)11 ...  l!unJnpUO:l Za l!ufpnpUOJ la  II Z S:JINOlli.:J3"l3 M3MOd 0.1 NOIl.
JOamUNI  , , ;  , ;  , ;  "  (!)V~  " A- "A  IVA £L'I  (!)JlOO'I~  "A  (11"",\  "A  (!)rod~  212 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Posit  holf  N egal  half  ,,, ! lrSCRI  ,,, ! lr SCR!  SCR I conducting  ,  " ,  ~ ,  ~ ,  ~ ,  .-,-'/ '"  V-SC R 2  lrSCR~  , , , , ,  ----~ -- - -~  ,  "" GU R E 3-61  , , , ,  lr SCR 3  lrSC~  (a)  ,b,  " ,  +  Lo'" }~("  - (a) A three-phase full-wave SC R bridge cirwit connected to a resistive load. (b) The operation of the  positive half of the SC R s. Assume 
that initially SCR I is conducting. If SCR 1 is triggered at any time  after point I. then SC R I will be reverse-biased and shut off. (c) Th e operation of the negative half of  the SC R s. Assume that initially SC~ is conducting. If SC R! is triggered at any time after point I.  then SC~ will be reverse-biased and shut off.  , , , , , , , ,  v  " , , , , , , , ,  , ,  "  , , , ,  ,  , , ,  , , , ,  INTR ODUCT ION TO PO WER ELECTRONI CS  , , , , ,  , ,  , , ,  , - , , , , , ,  , , ,  ,  , , , ,
 , , , ' , 'i " , " ," \' ,  , ,  \ " " '\ " / ' , " ,\ " f', ' "\,\1" I  \'\1'/\"",  \/ 'f \/ ,I \/ \'  " \' " 't' ,I '/  213  , , ,  ,  " I, /' \ I, I' ,  I' '\ " '\ " " f ,\ '\ " "1, ' I  "'\1' I, I," I  ", \' I", ,'\'  ' I \/ 1/ \/ \/ 1/ \/  \' I ,/ \! ' , " \ ," l ,\ " 1\ " , " ,\ '\ I' " ,\ \ " I", , II ,I \1\'1 \'\/11\/\"1 ,  " 'I ,I ,I \1 'I,  ) / \/ ' I ,I " / , I ,  , /' X /, >( >, /  ,/" ", ,/ ~" /" // '" /" /  " ~- ," "~ - _/ ,,--/" "~ - -" ,,~" '~ - -~  FIGURE 3-62  Approximating a 
linearly decreasing voltage with the three-phase full-wave SCR bridge circuit.  214 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Positive group Neg ative group  j ;;<) ,  SC R I r SC R 2 r SC R 1 r SC R 7 SC R, SCR,  -' -' -' +  ,,(') ( Lood  - SC R 4 r SCR~ r SC~ r SCRIO SCRll SC R l2  J J J  ""GU R E 3-63  One phase of a noncin:ulating current cycloconvener cin:ui1.  I f two of these SCR bridge circuits are connected in parallel with opposite  polarities, the result is a noncirculating current cycloconv
erter.  N oncirculating Current Cycloconverters  One phase of a typical noncirculating current cycJoconverter is show n in Figure  3--63. A fuJi three-phase cycloconverter consists of three identical units of this  type. Each unit consists of two three-phase full-wave SCR bridge circuits, one  conducting current in the positive direction (the positive group) and one conduct­ ing current in the negative direction (the negative group).llle SC R s in these cir­ cuits are triggered so as to approxim
ate a sinusoidal output voltage, with the SCRs  in the positive group being triggered when the current flow is in the positive di­ rection and the SCRs in the negative group being triggered when the current flow  is in the negative direction. Th e resulting output voltage is show n in Figure 3--64.  As can be seen from Figure 3--64, noncirculating current cycJoconverters  produce an output voltage with a fairly large harm onic component. TIlese high  harm onics limit the output frequency of the 
cycloconverter to a value less than  about one-third of the input frequency.  In addition, note that current flow mu st sw itch from the positive group to  the negative group or vice versa as the load current reverses direction. T he cycJo­ converter pulse-control circuits mu st detect this current transition with a current  polarity detector and sw itch from triggering one group of SCRs to triggering the  other group. T here is generally a brief period during the transition in which nei­ ther t
he positive nor the negative group is conducting. T his current pause causes  additional glitches in the output waveform.  TIle high harm onic content, low ma ximum frequency, and current glitches  associated with noncirculating current cycloconverters combine to limit their use.  INTRODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRON ICS 215  c---N egative+ Positive ------------------- group group  FIGU R E 3-64  The output voltage and current from a noncin:ulating current cycJoconvener connected to an  inductive loa
d. Note the switch from the operation of the negative group to the operation of the  positive group at the time the current changes direction.  In any practical noncircu lating current cyc1oconverter, a fi Iter (usually a series in­ ductor or a transformer) is placed between the output of the cyc1oconverter and  the load, to suppress some of the output hannonics.  C irculating Current Cycloco llverters  One phase of a typical circulating current cyc1oconverter is shown in Figure 3-65.  It differ
s from the noncirculating current cyc1oconverter in that the positive and  negative groups are connected through two large inductors, and the load is sup­ plied from center taps on the two inductors. Unlike the noncirculating current cy­ c1oconverter, both the positive and the negative groups are conducting at the same  time, and a circulating current flows around the loop fonned by the two groups  and the series inductors. T he series inductors mu st be quite large in a circuit ofthis  sort to 
limit the circulating current to a safe value.  T he output voltage from the circulating current cyc1oconverter has a smaller  hann onic content than the output voltage from the noncirculating current cyc1o­ converter, and its maximum frequency can be mu ch higher. It has a low power  factor due to the large series inductors, so a capacitor is often used for power­ factor comp ensation.  T he reason that the circulating current cyc1oconverter has a lowe r hann onic  content is shown in Figure 3-
-66. Figure 3--66a shows the output voltage of the  positive group, and Figure 3--66b shows the output voltage of the negative group.  T he output voltage V1oad(t) across the center taps of the inductors is  _ vpo,(t) - vrw:s(t)  Vtoait) - 2 (3-9)  N  -~  v,  v,  Vc  ~  ~  ~  isolation  transformer  HGURE 3-65  SC R [  V,\  VC/  SC R 4  +  "~  lr SC R 2 lr SC R 3 lr  lr SCR~ lr SC R 6 lr  "'_(1) '" Vp:>«t) - '>' .. g(t)  o  - One phase of a six-pulse type of cin:ulaling current cycloconverter.  
L,  "., +  J SC R 7 J SC R 8 J SCI<,  v, \  +  V/ Lo.,  J seRlO J seRll .J SC R l2  > ..  - - L,  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 217  Many of the high-frequency harmonic components which appear when the posi­ tive and negative groups are examined separately are comm on to both groups. As  such, they cancel during the subtraction and do not appear at the tenninals of the  cycloconverter.  Some recirculating current cycloconverters are m ore complex than the one  show n in Figure 3-65. With m
 ore sophisticated designs, it is possible to make  cycloconverters whose maximum output frequency can be even higher than their  input frequency. Th ese m ore complex devices are beyond the scope of this book.  , ,  , , , ,  ,  , ,  ,  , , , ,  /  , ,  ,  , , , ,  , , , ,  ,\ 1\ ,\  1\ 1 \ , \  "",,\  \1\'\1\  \1 \' " \  " \' \, \, , > '  \ 1 \ '\ ,\ I'  \ 1\ '\ ,\ 1\ " \1\1,1'" I \ I \ I \, \ \/ ~/ ~I  \I ,/ )' i< >(  / /' .... /" .... /', /' /, " .... _-" '" ,. ,"--' ,"--,,/ ....  , , , , , ,
 , ,  v  "  ,  , , , , , , , ,  , , ,  " , " .... _-"  FIGURE 3-66  ,  " , , , , , , ,  , ,  (a)  / -'  ,b,  , ,  "  , , ,  , , , '-'  Voltages in the six-pulse circulating current cycloconverter. (a) The voltage out of the positive group;  (b) the voltage out of the negative group.  218 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  , ,-~, ,--, ,-- ,'-', ,'- ' ,.-, ',,' ',/' '/' '" , , " ' "- A P;:- '/ /' /\ /\ \/ I\/\/~/  /\/\ \'~/\/'/  , " * 1 \ 'I '/ \1 ~ 'I \ '(  \ I' , ' /' , , " I / '  , I' 1"'1' \ I'
  \/\/\/\/1/1/1  , 1/ ' 1 ' / 1 "1 '  \ II 'I 'I \1 " ' \ I \1 \1 \1 \  " 1\ " II I, I' I  ,II II II " I , /1/  /\/\/\,'\/\'\1  / 'I ,I 'I \, \' \'  " \' " " '-/ ,I I'- , > 'I I'  , /\ I, I' ,I /' I,  , " /, /' /' /' /' ,/,1,1'/','", / 'I" 'I , ,/ ~I ,I ~I  V ,/ )/ )l -( (  /~, ,A, ,', /' /, /, " '--" '--" ,-,- ,~.," '--," '-.'/  HGURE 3--66 (concluded)  (e) the resulting load voltage.  3.8 HARMONIC PROBLEMS  " )  Power electronic comp onents and circuits are so flexible and useful that equip­ m
 enl control led by them now make s up 50 to 60 percent of the total load on most  pow er system s in the developed w orld. A s a result, the behavior of these power  electronic circuits strongly inn uences the overall operation of the power system s  that they are connected to.  TIle principal problem associated with power electronics is the harm onic  comp onents of voltage and current induced in the pow er system by the switching  transients in pow er electronic controllers. TIlese hannonics 
increase the total cur­ rent flow s in the lines (especially in the neutral of a three-phase pow er system ).  Th e extra currents cause increased losses and increased heating in pow er system  comp onents, requiring larger compon ents to supply the sam e total load. In addi­ tion, the high neutral currents can trip protective relays, shutting down portions of  a pow er system.  A s an example of this problem , consider a balanced three-phase m otor with  a w ye connection that draws 10 A at ful
l load. Wh en this m otor is connected to a  pow er system , the currents flowing in each phase will be equal in ma gnitude and  120 0  out of phase with each other, and the return current in the neutral will be 0  (see Figure 3--67). Now consider the same m otor supplied with the sam e total  pow er through a rectifier-inverter that pn:x:luces pulses of current. TIle currents in  the pow er line now are shown in Figure 3--68. Note that the nns current of each  line is still lOA , but the neutra
l also has an rm s current of 15 A ! Th e current in the  neutral consists entirely of hann onic comp onents.  Ie.  /"  '-- o o  I u<t.un:J  r- '-- o o  IU<llIlQ  /  ::>  o  "1  o  ,  v  )  o  "1  o  ,  o o  Ie-- /'  1"--- o o  o  ,  ~  ')  o  ,  219  N  N  o  2' )  ,  )  5  ,  ~ 0  5  -10 )  - I ,  -2' )  20  ,  )  , •  ~  )  5  - 10 )  - I 5  -20  T ime  ,,'  T ime  ,b,  20 1 }, 1,,1  'I 'I' I' 'I I \ I \  10 1 I III I III  ! :11 I r I II 1 II II 1 I  u  -51 I II I I 1 I I  - 10 I II I I \ I I
 I  - 15 1 I" " I \ i \ I  -20 1 \I \/1  T ime  'e'  20 1 1\1 It h 11\ 1/\ 11\1  'I I I III II I I I II I II II  10 1 I I III II I I I II I II II  ! :1 11\ II \ II \ II \ I \ III u  -51 I II I II II I II I I I II I  - 10 II I II I I I I I I II I II I I I  - 15 II I II I I I I I I II I II I I I  - 20 I \I \I \I \I \I I "I  T ime  ,d,  Jo'IG U RE 3-68  Current flow for a balanced three­ phase. wye<onnected mOlOr  connected to the power line through  a power electronic controller that  produces cur
rent pulses: (a) phase a;  (b) phaseb; (e) phasec; (d) neutral  The nlls current flow in phases a. b,  and c is \0 A. wh.ile the nns current  flow in the neutral is 15 A.  INTR ODUCT ION TO POWER ELECTRONICS 221  Th e spectra of the currents in the three phases and in the neutral are show n  in Figure 3--69. For the m otor connected directly to the line, only the fundamen­ tal frequency is present in the phases, and nothing at all is present in the neutral.  For the motor connected through the p
ower controller, the current in the phases in­ cludes both the fundamental frequency and all of the odd hann onics. TIle current  in the neutral consists principally of the third, ninth, and fifteenth harmonics.  Since power electronic circuits are such a large fraction of the total load on  a mod ern power system, their high hann onic content causes significant problem s  for the power system as a whole. N ew standards* have been created to limit the  amount of harmonics produced by power elect
ronic circuits, and new controllers  are designed to minimize the hannonics that they produce.  3.9 SUMMARY  Power electronic components and circui ts have produced a m~or revolution in the  area of motor controls during the last 35 years or so. Powe r electronics provide a  convenient way to convert ac power to dc power, to change the average voltage  level of a dc power system, to convert dc power to ac power, and to change the  frequency of an ac power system.  Th e conversion of ac to dc pow
er is accomplished by rectifier circuits, and  the resulting dc output voltage level can be controlled by changing the firing times  of the devices (SCR s, TRIAC s, GTO thyristors, etc.) in the rectifier circuit.  Adju stment of the average dc voltage level on a load is accomplished by  chopper circuits, which control the fraction of time for which a fixed dc voltage is  applied to a load.  Static frequency conversion is accomp lished by either rectifier-inverters or  cycloconverters. Inverters 
are of two basic types: externally cornrnutated and self­ commutated. Externally commutated inverters rely on the attached load for com­ mutation voltages; self-commutated inverters either use capacitors to produce the  required commutation voltages or use self-commutating devices such as GTO  thyristors. Self-commutated inverters include current source inverters, voltage  source inverters, and pulse-width modu lation inverters.  Cycloconverters are used to directly convert ac power at one frequ
ency to  ac power at another frequency. Th ere are two basic types of cycloconverters: non­ circulating current and circulating current. N oncirculating current cycloconverters  have large harmonic components and are restricted to relatively low frequencies.  In addition, they can suffer from glitches during current direction changes. Circu­ lating current cycloconverters have lower hannonic compon ents and are capable  of operating at higher frequencies. TIley require large series inductors to 
limit the  circulating current to a safe value, and so they are bulkier than noncirculating cur­ rent cycloconverters of the sam e rating.  *See IEC l00Q.3-2. EM C: Part 3. Section 2. "Limits for harmonic current emission (equipment input  current s 16 A per phase)," and A N SI/IEEE Standard 519-1992, "IEEE recomme nded practices and  requiremems for harmonic control in power systems."  N  N  N  30.000  J 25.000  J 20.000  i  J .• '0.. 15.000  ~  •  J lOilOO  0 '.000  "  45.000  40.000  35.000  
30.000  .a 25.000 o  ~  ~ 20.000  15ilOO  lOilOO  '.000  J  o 2 4  o -2 4  6 8 10 12 14  H arrnonicnumber  ,,'  I -6 -8 \0 12 14  H armonic number  'e'  16  16  25.000  J 20.000  • " 15.000 , .•  f ) 10000  ) 5.000  J  o  FIGU R E 3-69  -2 • 4  I  • 6 8 10 12 14 16  H armonic number  ,b,  (a) The spectrum of the phase current in the balanced three-phase.  wye-connected motor connected directly to the power line. Only the  fundamental frequency is present. (b) The spectrum of the phase  current i
n the balanced three-phase. wye-<:onnected motor connected  through a power electronic controller that produces current pulses.  T he fundamental frequency and all odd harmonics are pre.-;ent.  (c) The neutral current for the motor connected through a electronic  power controller. Th e third. ninth. and fifteenth harmonics are  present in the current  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O NICS 223  QUESTIONS  3-1. Explain the operation and sketch the output characteristic of a diode.  3-2. Expla
in the operation and sketch the output characteristic of a PNPN diode.  3-3. H ow does an SC R differ from a PNPN diode? Wh en does an SC R conduct?  3-4. Wh at is a G TO thyristor? H ow does it differ from an ordinary three-wire thyristor  (SCR )?  3-5. Wh at is an IG8T ? Wh at are its advantages comp ared to other powe r electronic  devices?  3-6. Wh at is a DIA C? A TRIA C?  3-7. D oes a single-phase full-wave rectifier produce a better or wo rse dc output than a  three-phase half-wave rectif
ier? Wh y?  3-8. Wh y are pulse-generating circuits needed in m otor controllers?  3-9. Wh at are the advantages of digital pulse-generating circuits comp ared to analog  pUlse-generating circuits?  3-10. Wh at is the effect of changing resistor R in Figure 3-32? Explain w hy this effect  occurs.  3-11. Wh at is forced conunutation? Wh y is it necessary in dc-to-dc powe r-control  circuits?  3-12. Wh at device(s) could be used to build dc-to-dc powe r-control circuits w ithout  forced conunutati
on?  3-13. Wh at is the purpose of a free-wheeling diode in a control circuit w ith an inductive  load?  3-14. What is the effect of an inductive load on the operation of a phase angle controller?  3-15. Can the on time of a chopper with series-capacitor commut ation be mad e arbitrarily  long? Wh y or w hy not?  3-16. C an the on time of a chopper w ith parallel-capacitor conunutation be m ade arbitrar- ily long? Wh y or w hy not?  3-17. Wh at is a rectifier-inverter? Wh at is it used for?  3-1
8. Wh at is a current-source inverter?  3-19. Wh at is a voltage-source inverter? Con trast the characteristics of a VSI w ith those  of a C SI.  3-20. What is pulse-width m odulation? H ow do PWM inverters comp are to CS I and V SI  inverters?  3-21. A re pow er transistors m ore likely to be used in PWM inverters or in CS I inverters?  Wh y?  PROBLEMS  3-1. C alculate the ripple factor of a three-phase half-wave rectifier circuit. both analyti­ cally and using MATLAB.  3-2. C alculate the ripp
le factor of a three-phase full-wave rectifier circuit. both analyti­ cally and using MATLAB.  3-3. Explain the operation of the circuit shown in Figure P3-1. Wh at wo uld happen in  this circuit if sw itch S, we re closed?  224 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  + 21 D,  • • I +  ) '~(') ") Y.  Lood  S, /- (-~I  SC R  0,  v,...(l) '" 339 sin 3771 V C 2 C]  FlG URE P3-1  The cin:uit of Problems 3-3 through 3--6.  3-4. Wh at wo uld the nns voltage on the load in the circuit in Figure P3-1 be 
if the firing  angle of the SC R were (a) 0°, (b) 30°, (c) 90°?  '3-5. For the circuit in Figure P3-1, assum e that VBO for the DlA C is 30 V, C t is I p.F, R  is adjustable in the range I to 20 ill, and sw itch SI is open. Wh at is the firing angle  of the circuit w hen R is 10 kO ? Wh at is the rillS voltage on the load lUlder these con­ ditions? (Caution: This problem is hard to solve analytically because the voltage  charging the capacitor varies as a function of time.)  3-6. On e problem w 
ith the circuit show n in Figure P3-1 is that it is very sensitive to vari­ ations in the inp ut voltage v.At). For exam ple, suppose the peak. value of the inp ut  voltage were to decrease. Th en the time that it takes capacitor C] to charge up to the  breakover voltage of the DI AC w ill increase, and the SC R w ill be triggered later in  each half-cycle. Th erefore, the rillS voltage supplied to the load w ill be reduced both  by the lowe r peak voltage and by the later firing. This same effe
ct happens in the  opposite direction if voc(t) increases. How could this circuit be m odified to reduce its  sensitivity to variations in input voltage?  3-7. Ex plain the operation of the circuit show n in Figure P 3-2, and sketch the outp ut  voltage from the circuit.  3-8. Figure P3-3 shows a relaxation oscillator w ith the follow ing param eters:  R ] = variable  C= IJ.tF  VBO = 30V  R 2 = 1500 0  Voc = 100 V  lH = 0.5 m A  (a) Sketch the voltages vc(t), vo(t), and rrJt) for this circuit.  
(b) If R, is currently set to 500 kO , calculate the period of this relaxation oscillator.  3-9. In the circuit in Figure P3-4, T] is an autotransform er w ith the tap exactly in the  center of its w inding. Explain the operation of this circuit. Assruning that the load is  inductive, sketch the voltage and current applied to the load. Wh at is the purpose of  SC R 2? Wh at is the purpose of D 2? (This chopper circuit arrangem ent is know n as a  Jones circuit.)  *The asterisk in front of a prob
lem number indicates that it is a more difficult problem.  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 225  • "~---T  ~  •  •  c, Lood  -- .,'----.L T,  T,  FIGUR E 1'3-2  Th e inverter circuit of Problem 3-7.  +~-----;  Voc'" lOOV  " J  +  +  Vc (I) (  '>'0 (/)  R2", 1500 n  C'" 1.0~  FIGU R E 1'3-3  Th e relaxation oscillator circuit of Problem 3--8.  +  J  SC R ] , icC  ~CR2 D,  •  T ] (Autotnlnsformer)  D, Lo ,d  FlG U R E P3-4  The chopper ci["(;uit of Problem 3-9.  226 ELECTRI C M AC HINER
Y RJNDAMENTALS  3-10. A series-capacitor forced commutation chopper circuit supplying a purely resistive  load is shown in Figure P3-5.  Voc = 120 V  lH = 8 rnA  VBO = 200 V  R l =20 kll  Rlood = 250 0  C = 150 /lF  (a) Wh en SCR l is turned on. how long will it rema in on? Wh at causes it to tum off?  (b) Wh en SCR l turns off. how long will it be until the SCR can be turned on again?  (A ssume that 3 time constants mu st pass before the capacitor is discharged.)  (c) Wh at problem or problems 
do these calculations reveal about this simple series­ capacitor forced-commutation chopper circuit?  (d) How can the problem (s) described in part c be eliminated?  +  SC R  0---/ +  R\ C ) "  - v oc  /  D ,~  ~ Rwm Lo,'  \  ""GU R E 1'3-5  The simple series-capacitor forced-commulation cin:uit of Problem 3-10.  3-11. A parallel-capacitor forced-conunutation chopper circuit supplying a purely resis­ tive load is show n in Figure P3-6.  Voc = 120 V  lH = 5 rnA  VBO = 250V  R ] =2 0kfi  Rlood = 2
50 0  C= 15 /lF  (a) Wh en SCR] is turned on, how long will it remain on? What causes it to IlUll off?  (b) What is the earliest time that SCR] can be turned off after it is turned on?  (A ssum e that 3 time constants mu st pass before the capacitor is charged.)  (c) Wh en SCR ] turns off, how long will it be until the SCR can be tlUlled on again?  (d) What problem or problems do these calculations reveal about this simple parallel­ capacitor forced-commutation chopper circuit?  (e) How can the 
problem (s) described in part d be eliminated?  3-12. Figure P3-7 shows a single-phase rectifier-inverter circuit. Explain how this circuit  ftmctions. What are the purposes of C] and C2? What controls the output frequency  of the inverter?  INTR O DU CT IO N T O PO WER ELECTR O N ICS 227  +  +,  D R LOAD " ~ R,  " - C - +  0--/  SC R l 0--/  FIGU R E P3-6  The simple parallel-capacitor forced commutation circuit of Problem 3- 11.  FIGU R E P3-7  The single-phase rectifier-inverter circuil of Pr
oblem 3- 12.  '3-13. A simple full-wave ac phase angle voltage controller is show n in Figure P3-8. Th e  com ponent values in this circuit are  R = 20 to 300 kf.!. currently set to 80 kf.!  C = 0.15 p.,F  VBO = 40 V (for PN PN diode D J)  VBO = 250 V (for SC R l)  rs(t) = VM sin w t V w here VM = 169.7 V and w = 377 radls  (a) At w hat phase angle do the PNPN diode and the SC R tum on?  (b) Wh at is the rm s voltage supplied to the load under these circwn stances?  '3-14. Figure P3-9 shows a th
ree-phase full-wave rectifier circuit supplying powe r to a dc  load. Th e circuit uses SC R s instead of diodes as the rectifying elem ents.  228 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  + R  SC R I ) vD (t)  v,m  C D,  ""G UR E I'J-S  Th e full-wave phase angle voltage controller of Problem 3- t3.  lr r lr  SC R I SC R 2 SC R 3  +  Lo.,  ir' r Ir  SC R, SC R 3 SC",  ""G UR E PJ-9  Th e lhree-phase full-wave reclifier circuit of Problem 3- t4.  (a) Wh at w ill the nns load voltage and ripple be i
f each SC R is triggered as soon as  it becom es forward-biased? At w hat phase angle should the SC R s be triggered  in order to operate this way? Sketch or plot the output voltage for this case.  (b) Wh at w ill the rm s load voltage and ripple be if each SC R is triggered at a phase  angle of 90° (that is, halfway through the half-cycle in w hich it is forward bi­ ased)? Sketch or plot the output voltage for this case.  '3-15. Write a MAT L AB program that imitates the operation of the pulse-
width m odula­ tion circuit show n in Fig ure 3-55, and answe r the follow ing questions.  (a) A ssum e that the comp arison voltages vjt) and vI') have peak amplitudes of  10 V and a frequency of 500 H z. Plot the output voltage w hen the input voltage  is Vinet) = 10 sin 2'lT ft V, andf = 60 H z .  (b) Wh at does the spectrwn of the output voltage look like? Wh at could be done to  reduce the hannonic content of the output voltage?  (c) N ow assum e that the frequency of the comp arison voltag
es is increased to  1000 H z. Plot the output voltage w hen the input voltage is Vinet) = 10 sin 2'lTft V  and/ = 60 H z.  (d) Wh at does the spectrum of the output voltage in c look like?  (e) Wh at is the advantage of using a higher com parison frequency and m ore rapid  sw itching in a PWM m odulator?  INT RO D UCT IO N T O POWE R EL ECTRO NI CS 229  REFEREN C ES  I. Dewan. S. 8.. G. R. Siemon. and A. Straughen. Power Semiconductor Drives. N ew York: Wiley­ Interscience.1984.  2. IEEE. Graphi
c Symbols for Electrical and Electronics Diagrams. IEEE Standard 315-19751AN SI  Standard Y32.2-1975.  3. M illman. Jacob. and Christos C. H alkias. Integrated Electronics: Analog and Digital Circuits and  Systems. N ew York: M cGraw- H ill. 1972.  4. Vithayathil. Joseph. Pov.·er Electronic:;: Principles and Applications. N ew York: M cGraw- H ill.  1995.  5. Werninck. E. H . (ed.). Electric Motor Handbook. London: M cGraw- H ill. 1978.  CHAPTER  4  AC MACHINERY  FUNDAMENTALS  AC  ma chines are 
generators that convert m echanical energy to ac electrical  energy and m otors that convert ac electrical energy to m echanical en­ ergy. Th e fundamental principles of ac ma chines are very simple, but unfortu­ nately, they are som ewhat obscured by the complicated construction of real ma­ chines. This chapter will first explain the principles of ac ma chine operation using  simple examples, and then consider som e of the complications that occur in real  ac ma chines.  TIlcre are two major cl
asses of ac rnachines-synchronous ma chines and in­ duction ma chines. Synchronous machines are m otors and generators whose ma g­ netic field current is supplied by a separate de power source, while induction ma­ chines are m otors and generators whose field current is supplied by ma gnetic  induction (transformer action) into their field windings. Th e field circuits of m ost  synchronous and induction ma chi nes are located on their rotors. nlis chapter cov­ ers some of the fundamentals comm 
on to both types of three-phase ac ma chines.  Synchronous ma chines will be covered in detail in Chapters 5 and 6, and induc­ tion ma chines will be covered in Chapter 7.  4.1 A SIMPLE LOOP IN A UNIFORM  MAGNETIC FIELD  W e will start our study of ac ma chines with a simple loop of wire rotating within  a uniform ma gnetic field. A loop of wire in a uniform ma gnetic field is the sim­ plest possible ma chine that produces a sinusoidal ac voltage. nlis case is not rep­ resentative of real ac ma 
chines, since the flux in real ac ma chines is not constant  in either ma gnitude or direction. H oweve r, the factors that control the voltage and  torque on the loop will be the same as the factors that control the voltage and  torque in real ac ma chines.  230  ACMAC HI NERYFUNDAMENTALS 231  rom  -------= ----- -----~---~---- ~~~  VcJ \ a/ -----L -----------T ---_  ' .... _-_ ....  N s  -~ ---------------------ii- "---- " is a uniform magnetic  field, aligned as shown.  ,.,  FIGU R E 4- 1  , 
 +  d  I  ,  I ,  I ,  I ,  I ,  I  'h'  b  , +  r-"  A simple rotating loop in a uniform magnetic field. (a) Front view; (b) view of coil.  Figure 4- 1 show s a simple ma chi ne consisting of a large stationary ma gnet  producing an essentially constant and uniform ma gnetic field and a rotating loop  of wire within that field. T he rotating part of the ma chine is called the rotor, and  the stationary part of the ma chine is called the stator. W e will now deterrnine the  voltages present in t
he rotor as it rotates within the ma gnetic field.  T he Vo ltage Induced in a Simple Ro tating Loop  I f the rotor of this ma chine is rotated, a voltage will be induced in the wire loop.  To detennine the ma gnitude and shape of the voltage, examine Figure 4-2. 1lle  loop of wire show n is rectangular, with sides ab and cd perpendicular to the plane  of the page and with sides be and da parallel to the plane of the page. The ma g­ netic field is constant and unifonn , pointing from left to rig
ht across the page.  To determine the total voltage e,OI on the loop, we will examine each seg­ m ent of the loop separately and sum all the resulting voltages. The voltage on  each segm ent is given by Equation (1-45):  eind = (v x H)-' (1-45)  I. Segment abo In this segm ent, the velocity of the wire is tangential to the path  of rotation, while the ma gnetic field B points to the right, as show n in Figure  4-2b. The quantity v x B points into the page, which is the same direction as  segm en
t abo Th erefore, the induced voltage on this segm ent of the wire is  eoo = (v x H)·'  = vBI sin (Jab into the page (4-1)  2. Segment be. In the first half of this segm ent, the quantity v x B points into the  page, and in the second half of this segment, the quantity v x B points out of  232 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  8  (a) (b) ( ,)  ""GURE 4-2  (a) Velocities and oriemations of the sides of the loop with respect to the magnetic field. (b) The  direction of motion with respect to the ma
gnetic field for side abo (c) The direction of motion with  respect to the magnetic field for side cd.  the page. Since the length I is in the plane of the page, v x B is perpendicular  to I for both portions of the segment. lllerefore the voltage in segment be will  be zero:  (4-2)  ), Segment ed, In this segment, the velocity of the wire is tangential to the path  of rotation, while the ma gnetic field B points to the right, as show n in Figure  4-2c. Th e quantity v x B points into the page, 
which is the same direction as  segment ed. TIlerefore, the induced voltage on this segm ent of the wire is  edc = (v x B ) ·1  = vBI sin (Jed out of the page (4-3)  4. Segment da. Just as in segm ent be, v x B is perpendicular to I. TIlerefore the  voltage in this segment will be zero too :  ead = 0 (4-4)  1lle total induced voltage on the loop ei!>d is the sum of the voltages on each of its  sides:  = vBI sin (Jab + vBI sin (Jed (4-5)  Note that (Jab = 180 0  - (Jed, and recall the trigonometr
ic identity sin (J = sin  (180 0  - (J). Th erefore, the induced voltage becomes  eind = 2vBL sin (J (4-6)  1lle resulting voltage eind is show n as a function of time in Figure 4-3.  TIlere is an alternative way to express Equation (4-6), which clearly relates  the behavior of the single loop to the behavior of larger, real ac ma chines. To de­ rive this alternative expression, examine Figure 4-2 again. If the loop is rotating  at a constant angular velocity w , then angle (J of the loop will i
ncrease linearly  with time. In other words,  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 233  • 2  FIGU RE 4-3  P lot of e ... versus a.  3 •  -,- (J = wt  e. radians  Also, the tangential velocity v of the edges of the loop can be expressed as  v = rw (4-7)  where r is the radius from axis of rotation out to the edge of the loop and w is the an­ gular velocity of the loop. Substituting these expressions into Equation (4-6) gives  e;nd = 2rwBI sin wi ( 4-!l)  N otice also from Figure 4-1 b that the area A of t
he loop is just equal to 2rl.  Th erefore,  e;nd = ABw sin wt (4-9)  Finally, note that the m aximum flux through the loop occurs when the loop is per­ pendicular to the ma gnetic flux density lines. This flux isjust the product of the  loop's surface area and the flux density through the loop .  q,max = AB  Th erefore, the final fonn of the voltage equation is  I e;nd q,rmu.w sin wt I  (4-10)  (4-11)  Thu s, the voltage generated in the loop is a sinusoid wh ose magn itude is  equal to the prod
uct oftheJ1ux inside the machine and the speed of rotation of the  machine. This is also true of real ac m achines. In general, the voltage in any real  ma chine will depend on three factors:  I. TIle flux in the ma chine  2. TIle speed of rotation  3. A constant representing the construction of the m achine (the number of loops,  etc.)  234 ELECTRIC M AC HIN ERY RJNDAMENTALS  ------------------------ ,,---~  ---~R---~ ... \--- J~: \ ""'""--(j I  ----~--------!"-~--- , --~--- -------------------
----- II  n is a uniform magnetic field. aligned as shown. The x in  a wire indicates current flowing into the page. and the • in  a wire indicates current flowing out of the page.  (a)  HGUR E 4-4  ,  ,  I ,  I I ,  I ,  d - I ,  I  ,b,  A current-carrying loop in a unifonn magnetic field. (a) F ront view; (b) view of coil.  I into page  ~' .~ ,  F  ,.,  lout of page  ,,'  ,"'IGURE 4-5  ~  r. ,"' into page n  roc'" 0  ,b,  r. ,"' out of page  •  ,d,  b  ,  I, "  (a) Derivation of force and torq
ue on segment ab. (b) Derivation of force and torque on segment bc.  (c) Derivation of force and torque on segment cd. (d) Derivation of force and torque on segment da.  The Torque Induced in a C urrent-Carrying Loop  Now assume that the rotor loop is at some arbitrary angle () with respect to the  ma gnetic field, and that a current i is flow ing in the loop, as shown in Figure 4--4.  If a current flows in the loop, then a torque will be induced on the wire loop. To  detennine the ma gnitude an
d direction of the torque, examine Figure 4-5. The  force on each segment of the loop will be given by Equation (1--43),  F = i(l x B ) (1-43)  w here  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 235  i = ma gnitude of current in the segment  I = length of the segm ent, with direction of I defined to be in the  direction of current flow  B = ma gnetic flux density vector  Th e torque on that segm ent will then be given by  7" = (force applied)(perpendicular distance)  = (F) (r sin (j)  = rF sin (j (1-6)  w here
 (J is the angle between the vector r and the vector F. Th e direction of the  torque is clockwise if it wo uld tend to cause a clockwise rotation and counter­ clockwise if it wou Id tend to cause a counterclockwise rotation.  I. Segment abo In this segm ent, the direction of the current is into the page, while  the ma gnetic field B points to the right, as shown in Figure 4-5a. Th e quantity  I x B points down. Therefore, the induced force on this segm ent of the wire is  TIle resulting torque 
is  F =i(lxB)  = ilB down  7"ab = (F) (r sin (jab)  = rilB sin (jab clockwise (4-12)  2. Segment be. In this segm ent, the direction of the current is in the plane of the  page, while the ma gnetic field B points to the right, as shown in Figure 4-5b.  TIle quantity I x B points into the page. Therefore, the induced force on this  segm ent of the wire is  F =i(lxB)  = ilB into the page  For this segm ent, the resulting torque is 0, since vectors r and I are parallel  (both point into the page), 
and the angle (jbc is O.  7"bc = (F) (r sin (jab)  ~O (4-13)  3. Segment ed. In this segment, the direction of the current is out of the page,  while the ma gnetic field B points to the right, as show n in Figure 4-5c. Th e  quantity I x B points up. Th erefore, the induced force on this segment of the  wire is  F =i(lxB)  = ilB up  236 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  The resulting torque is  Ted = (F) (r sin Oed )  = rilB sin O ed clockwise (4-14)  4. Segmentda. In this segment. the direction 
of the current is in the plane of the  page, while the ma gnetic field B points to the right, as show n in Figure 4-5d.  Th e quantity I x B points out of the page. 1llerefore, the induced force on  this segm ent of the wire is  F = i(l x B )  = ilB out of the page  For this segment, the resulting torque is 0, since vectors r and I are parallel  (both point out of the page), and the angle 000 is O.  Too = (F) (r sin O"J  ~O (4- 15)  1lle total induced torque on the loop Tind is the sum of the to
rques on each of  its sides:  = rilB sin Oab + rilB sin Oed  Note that Oab = Oc.t, so the induced torque becomes  TiDd = 2rilB sin 0  (4-16)  (4-17)  TIle resulting torque TiDd is show n as a function of angle in Figure 4-6. N ote that  the torque is ma ximum when the plane of the loop is parallel to the mag netic field,  and the torque is zero when the plane of the loop is perpendicular to the ma g­ netic field.  TIlere is an alternative way to express Equation (4-17), which clearly re­ lates t
he behavior of the single loop to the behavior of larger, real ac ma chines. To  derive this alternative expression, examine Figure 4-7. I f the current in the loop is  as shown in the figure, that current will generate a mag netic flux density Bloop with  the direction show n. Th e ma gnitude of B loop will be  _ 1!i.. Bloop - G  where G is a factor that depends on the geometry of the loop.* Also, note that the  area of the loop A is just equal to 2rl. Substituting these two equations into Equa
­ tion (4-17) yields the result  (4- 18)  *If the loop were a cirde. then G", 2r. where r is the radius of the circle. so B""" '" lJ.inr. For a rec­ tangular loop. the value of G will vary depending on the exact length-to-width ratio of the loop.  FIGU RE 4-6  Plot of 1' ... versus (J .  ....  (.) (b)  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 237  e. radians  Jo'IGURE4-7  Derivation of the induced torque equation.  (a) Th e current in the loop produces a  magnetic flul( density "loop perpendicular to  the pl
ane of the loop; (b) geometric  relationship between D ioop and O s.  (4-19)  w here k = AG IJ1 is a factor depending on the construction of the ma chine, Bs is  used for the stator ma gnetic field to distinguish it from the ma gnetic field gener­ ated by the rotor, and () is the angle between B loop and Bs. Th e angle between B loop  and B s can be seen by trigonometric identities to be the same as the angle () in  Equation (4-17).  B oth the ma gnitude and the direction of the induced torque c
an be deter­ mined by expressing Equation (4--19) as a cross product:  (4-20)  App lying this equation to the loop in Fig ure 4-7 produces a torque vector into the  page, indicating that the torque is clockwise, with the ma gnitude given by Equa­ tion (4-19).  Thu s, the torque induced in the loop is proportional to the strength of the  loop's mag netic field, the strength of the external magnetic field, and the sine of  the angle between them. This is also true of real ac ma chines. In general,
 the  torque in any real ma chine will depend on four factors:  238 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I. The strength of the rotor ma gnetic field  2. The strength of the external ma gnetic field  3. The sine of the angle between them  4. A constant representing the construction of the ma chine (geometry. etc.)  4.2 THE ROTATING MAGNETIC FIELD  In Section 4.1, we showed that if two ma gnetic fields are present in a ma chine,  then a torque will be created which will tend to line up the two ma gne
tic fields. If  one ma gnetic field is produced by the stator of an ac ma chine and the other one is  produced by the rotor of the ma chine, then a torque will be induced in the rotor  which will cause the rotor to turn and align itself with the stator ma gnetic field.  I f there were som e way to mak e the stator ma gnetic field rotate, then the in­ duced torque in the rotor would cause it to constantly "chase" the stator ma gnetic  field around in a circle. lllis, in a nutshell, is the basic p
rinciple of all ac motor  operation.  H ow can the stator ma gnetic field be made to rotate? llle fundamental prin­ ciple of ac ma chine operation is that if a three-phase set of currents, each of equal  mngnitude and differing in phase by 120°,flows in a three-phase winding, then it  will produce a rotating mngnetic field of constant mngnitude. The three-phase  winding consists of three separate wi ndi ngs spaced 120 electrical degrees apart  around the surface of the ma chine.  llle rotating m
a gnetic field concept is illustrated in the simplest case by an  empty stator contai ning just three cai Is, each 120 0  apart (see Figure 4-8a). Since  such a winding produces only one north and one south ma gnetic pole, it is a two­ pole winding.  To understand the concept of the rotating ma gnetic field, we will apply a set  of currents to the stator of Figure 4--8 and see what happens at specific instants of  time. Assume that the currents in the three coils are given by the equations  iaa'
 (1) = 1M sin wt A  ibb' (1) = 1M sin (wt - 120°)  icc' (1) = 1M sin (wt - 240°)  A  A  (4-2 I a)  (4-21 b)  (4-2Ic)  llle current in coil aa' flows into the a end of the coil and out the a' end of  the coil. It produces the ma gnetic field intensity  A ·turns/m (4-22a)  where 0° is the spatial angle of the ma gnetic field intensity vector, as show n in  Figure 4-8b. llle direction of the ma gnetic field intensity vector H ad(t) is given  by the right-hand rule: If the fingers of the right hand 
curl in the direction of the  current flow in the coil, then the resulting ma gnetic field is in the direction that the  thumb points. N otice that the ma gnitude of the ma gnetic field intensity vector  H "..,(l) varies sinusoidally in time, but the direction of H ad(l) is always constant.  Similarly, the ma gnetic field intensity vectors H b/;o,(l) and H «(l) are  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 239  ° ,  ° b'  FIGURE 4-8  11",,-(/)  11",-(/)  "",,(0  0"  "I  o a'  (a) A simple three-phase stator.
 Currents in this stator are assumed positive if they flow into the  unprimed end and out the primed end of the coils. Th e magnetizing intensities produced by each coil  are also shown. (b) Th e magnetizing intensity vector H .... (/) produced by a current flowing in coil 00'.  A · turns/ m (4-22b)  A·turns/m (4-22c)  Th e flux densities resulting from these ma gnetic field intensities are given  by Equation (1-2 1):  Th ey are  Baa' (1) = BM sin wl L 0 ° T  B bb' (1) = BM sin (wl-120°) L 120° 
 B C<", (1) = BM sin (wl-240°) L 240°  T  T  (1-21)  (4-23a)  (4-23b)  (4-23c)  w here BM = J1HM . 1lle currents and their corresponding flux densities can be ex­ amined at specific times to detennine the resulting net ma gnetic field in the stator.  For exampl e, at time w t = 0°, the ma gnetic field from coil ad will be  B "",,= 0  Th e ma gnetic field from coil bb' will be  B bI>' = BM sin (_1 20°) L 120 0  and the ma gnetic field from coil ee' wi] I be  B C<", = BM sin (_ 240°) L 240°  (4-24
a)  (4-24b)  (4-24c)  240 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ,  '" b'  ""GU R E 4-9  0,  WI = 0"  (a)  o  b  o ,  o  '" b'  ncr .  ~  R~  "w  '"  ,  c  '" ,  WI =90°  (b)  (a) The vector magnetic field in a stator at time WI = 0°. (b) Th e vector magnetic field in a sta.tor a.t  time WI = 90°.  TIle total m agnetic field from all three coils added together will be  Bne! = Baa' + Bw + B ee'  = 0 + (-f BM ) L 120° + (f BM ) L240°  = 1.5BM L-9Q 0  TIle resulting net mag netic field is show n in Fi
gure 4-9a.  b  As another example, look at the mag netic field at time w t = 90°. At that  time, the currents are  i",,' = 1M sin 90° A  i"",= IM sin(-300) A  iec,= IM sin(-1500) A  and the ma gnetic fields are  B"",= BM LO°  B"", = -0.5 BM L 120 0  B ec' = -0.5 BM L 240 0  Th e resulting net mag netic field is  Bn .. = Baa' + B"". + B .....  = BM L 0° + (-O.5BM) L 120° + (-O.5BM ) L 240°  = 1.5 BM LO°  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 241  Th e resulting ma gnetic field is show n in Figure 4-9b. N o
tice that although the di­ rection of the ma gnetic field has changed, the magnitude is constant. TIle ma g­ netic field is maintaining a constant ma gnitude whi le rotating in a counterclock­ wise direction.  Proof of the Rotating Magnetic Field Concept  At any time t, the ma gnetic field wi ll have the sam e ma gnitude I.5BM , and it wi ll  continue to rotate at angu lar velocity w. A proof of this statement for all time t is  now given.  Refer again to the stator show n in Figure 4-8. In the 
coordinate system  show n in the figure, the x direction is to the right and the y direction is upward.  TIle vector:l1 is the unit vector in the horizontal direction, and the vector S' is the  unit vector in the vertical direction. To find the total ma gnetic flux density in the  stator, simply add vectorially the three comp onent ma gnetic fields and detennine  their sum.  Th e net ma gnetic nux density in the stator is given by  B •• (I) ~ B _, (I) + B~, (I) + B~, (I)  = BM sin w t LO° + BMsi
n (wt - 120°) L 120° + BM sin (wi_ 240°) L 2400T  Each of the three compon ent ma gnetic fields can now be broken down into its x  and y comp onents.  B net(t) = BM sin wt x  - [O.5BM sin (wt - 1200)]x + ['] BM sin (wt - 1200)]y  - [O.5BM sin (wt - 2400)]x - ['] BM sin (wt - 2400)]y  Combining x and y compon ents yields  D net(t) = [B M sin wi - O.SBM sin (wt - 120°) - O.5BM sin (wt - 240°)] x  + ['7 B Msin(wt - 120°) - '7 BMsin (wt - 2400)]y  B y the angle-addition trigonom etric identities,  B
 netCt) = [BM sin wi + iBM sin wt + 1 BM cos wi + iBM sin wt -1B M cos wt]x  + [-1BMsinwt - ~BMCOSWt + ~BM sinwt - ~BMCOSWt] S'  I B neln = (1.5BM sin wt):I1 - (1.5BM cos wI)y I (4-25)  Equation (4-25) is the final expression for the net ma gnetic flux density. N otice  that the ma gnitude of the field is a constant I.SBM and that the angle changes con­ tinually in a counterclockwise direction at angular velocity w. N otice also that at  242 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  N - \ 0  .\ b  ""GU
 R E 4-10  The rotating magnetic field in a stator  represented as moving north and south stator  poles.  wi = 0°, B DeI = I .SBM L _90° and that at w t = 90°, B ne, = 1.58M L 0°. 1l1ese re­ sults agree with the specific examp les examined previously.  The Relationship between Electrical Frequency  and the Speed of Magnetic Field Rotation  Figure 4-10 shows that the rotating ma gnetic field in this stator can be represented  as a north pole (wh ere the flux leaves the stator) and a south pole (w
here the flux  enters the stator). The se ma gnetic poles complete one m echanical rotation around  the stator surface for each electrical cycle of the applied current. 1l1erefore, the  me chanical speed of rotation of the ma gnetic field in revolutions per second is  equal to the electric frequency in hertz:  two poles  two poles  (4-26)  (4-27)  H ere 1m and w,., are the me chanical speed in revol utions per second and radians per  second, while!. and W e are the electrical speed in hertz and 
radians per second.  Notice that the windings on the two-pole stator in Figure 4- 10 occur in the  order (taken counterclockwise)  a-c'-b-a '-c-b'  What wo uld happen in a stator if this pattern were repeated twice within it? Fig­ ure 4-lla shows such a stator. Th ere, the pattern of windings (taken counter­ clockwise) is  a-c '-b-a' -c-b '-a-c '-b-a '-c-b'  which is just the pattern of the previous stator repeated twice. Wh en a three-phase  set of currents is applied to this stator, two north 
poles and two south poles are pro­ duced in the stator winding, as show n in Figure 4-11 b. In this winding, a pole  ACMAC HI NERYFUNDAMENTALS 243  b, b,~ ~ @ ~ s @  "  ai / II  " "; • 0 0 0 w. w. 0  "i / oi  " i!1 @ ~i!1 b, b,  b'  '\ll  (a) (b)  , "  b , "  b  B ack:  1  '"' of  stator  coils  • • 8 •  X • X •  II ,s, II ,N, I-I ,s, II ,N, , , , , , , , ,  ! ! ! I I I ", '; b, "i " bi ", 'i b, "; C2 bi  ) j j I , b , Counterclock:wise b'  f')  FIGU R E 4- 11  (a) A simple four-pole stator wind
ing. (b) The resulting stator magnetic poles. Notice that there are  moving poles of alternating polarity every 90° around the stator surface. (c) A winding diagram of  the stator as seen from its inner surface, showing how the stator currents produce north and south  magnetic poles.  mo ves only halfway around the stator surface in one electrical cycle. Since one  electrical cycle is 360 electrical degrees, and since the m echanical motion is 180  m echanical degrees, the relationship between t
he electrical angle Oe and the me­ chanical angle 0", in this stator is  (4-28)  T hus for the four-pole winding, the electrical frequency of the current is twice the  m echanical frequency of rotation:  244 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  fe = 2fm four poles  W e = 2w m four poles  (4-29)  (4-30)  I n general, if the number of ma gnetic poles on an ac ma chine stator is P, then  there are PI2 repetitions of the winding sequence a-c '-b-a '-e-b' around its inner  surface, and the electrical and
 m echanical quantities on the stator are related by  le, ~ iem l (4-3 1)  (4-32)  (4-33)  Also, noting that fm = n,,/60, it is possible to relate the electrical frequency in  hertz to the resulting m echanical speed of the ma gnetic fields in revol utions per  minute. nlis relationship is  Reversing the Direction of Magnetic  Field Rotation  (4-34)  Another interesting fact can be observed about the resulting ma gnetic field.lfthe  current in any two of the three coils is swapped, the direction
 of the mngnetie  field's rotation will be reversed. This mean s that it is possible to reverse the direc­ tion of rotation of an ac m otor just by sw itching the connections on any two of the  three coils. lllis result is verified below.  To prove that the direction of rotation is reversed, phases bb' and ee' in Fig­ ure 4-8 are sw itched and the resulting flux density Bn .. is calculated.  llle net ma gnetic flux density in the stator is given by  B ... ,(t) = B"".(t) + Bw(t) + B eA t)  = BM s
in wi L 0° + BM sin (wi-240 °) L 120° + BM sin (wI-120°) L 240 ° T  Each of the three comp onent ma gnetic fields can now be broken down into its x  and y compon ents:  B DeI(t) = BM sin wt5i.  - [0.5BM sin (wt - 240 0)]5i. + [1" BM sin (wt - 240 0 )]y  - [0.5BM sin (wt - I 200)]5i. - [1" BM sin (wt - 120 0 )]y  Combining x and y components yields  ACMAC HINERYFUND AMENTALS 245  H nem = [BM sin wt - O.5BM sin (wt - 240 °) - 0.5BM sin(WI' - 120 0jx  + ['7 BM sin (WI' - 240 °) - '7 BM sin (wt - l2
00)]y  B y the angle-addition trigo nom etric identities,  S nelt) = [BM sin WI' + iBM sin wt -1 BM cos WI' + iBM sin wt + IBM cos wt]x  + [-1BMsinwt + ~BM COS Wt + ~BM sinwt + ~BMCOSWt] S  I S nell) = (1.5BM sin w t)J1 + (1.5BM cos WI')Y I (4-35)  This time the ma gnetic field has the sam e ma gnitude but rotates in a clock­ wise direction. 1l1erefore, switching the currents in two stator phases reverses the  direction of magnet ic field rotation in an ac machine.  EXllmple 4-1. Create a MATLAB
 program that models the behavior of a rotating  ma gnetic field in the three-phase stator shown in Figure 4-9.  Solutioll  The geometry of the loops in this stator is fIXed as shown in Figure 4-9. The currents in the  loops are  i"",(t) = 1M sin wt A  iw(t) = 1M sin (wt - 120°)  iec,(t) = 1M sin (wt - 240°)  and the resulting ma gnetic flux densities are  B "",(t)= BM sinwt LO° T  A  A  B "",(t) = BM sin (wt - 120°) L 120°  Bec,(t) = BM sin (wt - 240°) L 240°  <jl = 2rlB = dlB  T  T  (4-2Ia)  (
4-21b)  (4-21c)  (4-23a)  (4-23b)  (4-23c)  A simple MATLAB program that plots B oo" BI+" Bee'. and B"", as a ftmction of time is  shown below:  % M-file, mag _ fie ld.m  % M-file t o calc ulate the net magnetic fie ld produ ced  % by a three-phase stato r.  % Se t up the basic con d itio n s  bmax = 1; % N o rmalize bmax t o 1  freq = 60, % 60 Hz  w = 2*p i* freq, % a n g ular ve loc ity ( rad/s )  % First , generate the three component magnetic fie lds  t = 0,1/6000, 1 /60,  Baa = s in(w* t ) 
.* (cos (O ) + j*s in(O )),  246 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Ebb = s in(w*t- 2*p i /3) * (cos (2*p i /3) + j*s in(2*p i /3));  E cc = s in(w*t+ 2*p i /3) * (cos (- 2*p i /3) + j*s in(- 2*p i /3));  !l; Ca lc ulate Enet  Enet = Baa + Ebb + E cc;  !l; Ca lc ulate a c irc le representing the expected max imum  !l; va lue o f Enet  c irc le = 1.5 * (cos (w*t) + j *sin (w*t ) ) ;  !l; Plo t the magnitude and d irection of the r esulting magn e tic  !l; fie lds. N o te that Baa i s b lack, Bbb 
i s b lue, B cc i s  !l; magenta , and Enet i s red.  fo r ii = l,length(t )  !l; Plo t the reference c irc l e  p lo t (circ le, 'k') ;  h o ld o n;  !l; Plo t the fo ur magneti c fie lds  p lo t ( [0 real (Baa (il))] , [0 imag (Baa (il))] , 'k', 'LineW idth' ,2);  p lo t ( [0 real (Ebb (il) ) ] , [0 imag (Bbb (il) ) ] , 'b' , 'LineW idth ' ,2) ;  p lo t ( [0 real (Bec (il) ) ] , [0 imag (B ec (il) ) ] , 'm' , 'LineW idth ' ,2) ;  p lo t ( [O real(Enet (il))] , [0 imag (Bn e t (il))] ,'r','Line
W idth ',3) ;  axi s squ are;  axi s([-2 2 - 2 2 ] ) ;  drawnow;  h o ld o ff;  ond  When this program is executed, it draws lines corresponding to the three component mag­ netic fields as well as a line corresponding to the net magnetic field. Execute this program  and observe the behavior of B .....  4.3 MAGNETOMOTIVE FORCE AND FLUX  DISTRIBUTION ON AC MACHINES  In Section 4.2, the flux produced inside an ac ma chine was treated as if it were in  free space. TIle direction of the flux density 
produced by a coil of wire was as­ sum ed to be perpendicular to the plane of the coil, with the direction of the flux  given by the right-hand rule.  TIle flux in a real mnchine does not behave in the simple manner assumed  above, since there is a ferromagnetic rotor in the center of the ma chine, with a  small air gap between the rotor and the stator. TIle rotor can be cylindrical, like the  one show n in Figure 4-12a, or it can have pole faces projecting out from its  surface, as show n in Fi
gure 4-12b. If the rotor is cylindrical, the ma chine is said  to have nonsalient poles; if the rotor has pole faces projecting out from it, the  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 247  o o  o o  ,,' ,b,  FIGURE 4- 12  (a) An ac m achine with a cylindrical or nonsalient-pole rotor. (b) An ac machine with a salient-pole  rotor.  ma chine is said to have salient poles. Cy lindrical rotor or nonsalient-pole ma­ chines are easier to understand and analyze than salient-pole ma chines, and this  discussion w
ill be restricted to ma chines with cylindrical rotors. M achines with  salient poles are discussed briefly in Appendix C and m ore extensively in Refer­ ences I and 2.  Refer to the cylindrical-rotor ma chine in Figure 4-12a. The reluctance of  the air gap in this ma chine is mu ch higher than the reluctances of either the rotor  or the stator, so the flux density vector B takes the shortest possible path across  the air gap and jump s perpendicularly between the rotor and the stator.  To produ
ce a sinusoidal voltage in a ma chine like this, the magnitude of the  flux density vector B must vary in a sinusoidal mann er along the surface of the air  gap. TIle flux density will vary sinusoidally only if the ma gnetizing intensity H  (and ma gnetom otive force ?f) varies in a sinusoidal mann er along the surface of  the air gap (see Figure 4-13).  The m ost straightforward way to achieve a sinusoidal variation of ma gneto­ m otive force along the surface of the air gap is to distribute th
e turns of the wind­ ing that produces the ma gnetom otive force in closely spaced slots around the  surface of the ma chine and to vary the number of conductors in each slot in a  sinusoidal manner. Figure 4-14a shows such a winding, and Figure 4-14b shows  the ma gnetom otive force resulting from the winding. TIle number of conductors  in each slot is given by the equation  nc = N ecos a (4-36)  w here N e is the number of conductors at an angle of 0°. As Figure 4-14b shows,  this distribution
 of conductors produces a close approximation to a sinusoidal dis­ tribution of ma gnetom otive force. Furthermore, the m ore slots there are around  the surface of the ma chine and the m ore closely spaced the slots are, the better this  approximation becom es.  248 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  B=BMsina  Stator  Air gap  R otor-I--f--L  a  ,,)  • or (lH .)-I)  ~ __ L-__ L-__ L-__ \-__ ~ __ ~ __ ~ __ +--a  (b)  '".  ~ __ L-__ L-__ L-__ \-__ ~ __ ~ __ ~ __ +--a  'e)  "" G UR E 4-1J  (a
) A cylindrical rotor with sinusoidally varying air-gap flux density. (b) The magnetomotive force or  magnetizing imensity as a function of angle a in the air gap. (c) The flux density as a function of  angle a in the air gap.  ACMAC HI NERYFUNDAMENTALS 249  3 3  7 7  •  10 • --ill! 10  ----a  10 0 @IO  • Ell  7 7  • 0 Assume Nc '" 10 3 3  ,.,  ~  20  ,3 'L  , ,  10 -!- --',  , , , ,  0 a  60 120 180 \ 240 300 "60 , , ,  - 10 ";- ---t , ,  -20  ""  ,b,  F IGU R E 4-14  (a) An ac machine with a d
istributed stator winding designed to produce a sinusoidally varying air­ gap flux density. The number of conductors in each slot is indicated on the diagram. (b) Th e  magnetomotive force distribution resulting from the winding. compared to an ideal distribution.  In practice, it is not possible to distribute windings exactly in accordance  with Equation (4-36), since there are only a finite number of slots in a real ma­ chine and since only integral numbers of conductors can be included in eac
h slot.  Th e resulting ma gnetom otive force distribution is only approximately sinusoidal,  and higher-order harm onic components will be present. Fractional-pitch windings  are used to suppress these unwanted harm onic comp onents, as explained in Ap­ pendix S.l.  250 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Furthennore, it is often convenient for the ma chine designer to include  equal numb ers of conductors in each slot instead of varying the number in accor­ dance with Equation (4--36). Windings o
f this type are described in Appendix B.2;  they have stronger high-order harmonic compon ents than windings designed in  accordance with Equation (4-36). The harmonic-suppression techniques of Ap­ pendix B.I are especially important for such windings.  4.4 INDUCED VOLTAGE IN AC MACHINES  Just as a three-phase set of currents in a stator can produce a rotating ma gnetic  field, a rotating ma gnetic field can produce a three-phase set of voltages in the  coils of a stator. 1lle equations governin
g the induced voltage in a three-phase sta­ tor will be developed in this section. To make the development easier, we will be­ gin by looking at just one single-turn coil and then expand the results to a more  general three-phase stator.  The Induced Voltage in a Coil  on a Two-Pole Stator  Figure 4-15 shows a rotating rotor with a sinusoidally distributed ma gnetic field in  the center of a stationary coil. Notice that t his is the reverse of the situation studied  in Section 4.1, which involve
d a stationary ma gnetic field and a rotating loop.  W e will assume that the ma gnitude of the flux density vector B in the air  gap between the rotor and the stator varies sinusoidally with me chanical angle,  while the direction of B is always radially outward. 1llis sort of flux distribution  is the ideal to which ma chine designers aspire. (What happens when they don't  achieve it is described in Appendix B.2.) If (l is the angle m easured from the  direction of the peak rotor flux density,
 then the ma gnitude of the nux density  vector B at a point around the rotor is given by  B = BM cos (l (4-37a)  Note that at som e locations around the air gap, the nux density vector will really  point in toward the rotor; in those locations, the sign of Equation (4-37a) is nega­ tive. Since the rotor is itself rotating within the stator at an angular velocity W m , the  ma gnitude of the nux density vector B at any angle a around the stator is given by  I B - BM cos(wt - a ) I  1lle equation
 for the induced voltage in a wire is  e= (v x B )·1  where v = velocity of the wire relative to the magneticfield  B = ma gnetic flux density vector  I = length of conductor in the magnetic field  (4-37b)  (1-45)  AC MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 251  I  d  ,,)  " Air-gap flux density:  Air gap t B(a )=B M cos(oo",l- a )  Stator  Rotor  0--vrel  o c-d  ,  a ,  ,  : "M ,  o (J - b  Voltage is really into the page.  since B is negative here.  (b)  FIGU RE 4- 15  B  e  b  'e)  (a) A rotating rotor mag
netic field inside a stationary stator coil. Detail of coil. (b) Th e vector  magnetic flux densities and velocities on the sides of the coil. The velocities shown are from a frame  of reference in which the magnetic field is stationary. (c) The flux density distribution in the air gap.  252 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  H owever, this equation was derived for the case of a moving wire in a stationnry  mngnetie field. In this case, the wire is stationary and the ma gnetic field is mov­ ing, s
o the equation does not directly apply. To use it, we mu st be in a frame of  reference where the ma gnetic field appears to be stationary. Ifwe "sit on the ma g­ netic field" so that the field appears to be stationary, the sides of the coil will ap­ pear to go by at an apparent velocity vre[, and the equation can be applied. Figure  4-15b shows the vector ma gnetic field and velocities from the point of view of a  stationary ma gnetic field and a mo ving wire.  TIle total voltage induced in the
 coil will be the sum of the voltages induced  in each of its four sides. These voltages are detennined below:  I. Segment abo For segm ent ab, a = 180°. Assuming that B is directed radially  outward from the rotor, the angle between v and B in segm ent ab is 90°,  while the quantity v x B is in the direction of I, so  e"", = (v x B)· 1  = vBI directed out of the page  = -V[BM cos (w ",t - 180°)]1  = -vBtJ cos (w",t - 180°) (4-38)  where the minus sign com es from the fact that the voltage is bu
ilt up with a  polarity opposite to the assumed polarity.  2. Segment be. The voltage on segment be is zero, since the vector quantity  v x B is perpendicular to I, so  ecb = (v x B ) -I = 0 (4-39)  3. Segment ed. For segm ent ed, the angle a = 0°. Assuming that B is directed  radially outward from the rotor, the angle between v and B in segment ed is  90°, while the quantity v x B is in the direction ofl, so  eJc = (v x B) -I  = vBI directed out of the page  = v(BM cos w n,l)l  = vBtJ cos w.,/ 
(4-40)  4. Segment da. The voltage on segment da is zero, since the vector quantity  v x B is perpendicular to I, so  ead = (v x B ) -I = 0  Therefore, the total voltage on the coil wi ll be  eind = e"" + edc  = -vBtJ cos(w",t - 180°) + vBtJ cos w ",t  Since cos () = - cos «() - 180°),  (4-41)  (4-42)  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 253  ei!>d = vB&I cos w mt + vB&I cos w mt  = 2vB&I cos w mt (4--43)  Since the velocity of the end conductors is given by v = rwm , Equation  (4--43) can be rewritten 
as  ei!>d = 2(rw m )B&I cos wmt  = 2rlB~m cos w mt  Finally, the flux passing through the coil can be expressed as <p = 2rlBm (see  Problem 4-7), whi le W m = W e = W for a two-pole stator, so the induced voltage  can be expressed as  I eind - ¢w cos wi I (4-44)  Equation (4--44) describes the voltage induced in a single-turn coil. If the coil  in the stator has N c turns of wire, then the total induced voltage of the coil will be  I eind - Nc¢w cos wt I (4-45)  N otice that the voltage produced
 in stator of this simple ac ma chine wind­ ing is sinusoidal with an amplitude which depends on the flux <p in the ma chine,  the angular velocity w of the rotor, and a constant depending on the construction  of the machine (Nc in this simple case). This is the sam e as the result that we ob­ tained for the simple rotating loop in Section 4.1.  N ote that Equation (4--45) contains the term cos w t instead of the sin wt  found in some of the other equations in this chapter. 1lle cosine tenn has 
no spe­ cial significance compared to the sine- it resulted from our choice of reference  direction for 0: in this derivation. If the reference direction for 0: had been rotated  by 90° we wo uld have had a sin wt tenn.  The Induced Vo ltage in a Three-Phase Set of Co ils  If three coils, each of Nc turns, are placed around the rotor ma gnetic field as  show n in Figure 4-16, then the voltages induced in each of them will be the same  in ma gnitude but wi II differ in phase by 120°. 1lle resulti
ng voltages in each of the  three coils are  e .... .(t) = Nc <Pw sin wt V  ew(r) = Nc <Pw sin (w t - 120°)  ee,,,(t) = Nc <pw sin (wt-240 0)  v  V  (4--46a)  (4-46b)  (4--46c)  Th erefore, a three-phase sct of currents can generate a unifonn rotating  ma gnetic field in a ma chine stator, and a uniform rotating ma gnetic field can gen­ erate a three-phase sct of voltages in such a stator.  254 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ~.M  FIGURE 4- 16  The production of three-phase voltages from  three
 coils spaced 120° apan.  The RMS Voltage in a Three-Phase Stator  TIle peak voltage in any phase of a three-phase stator of this sort is  Since w = 2nf, this equation can also be written as  Enuu = 27rNc <pf  TIlerefore, the nns voltage of any phase of this three-phase stator is  2,,- EA = \lfNc<pf  IE, -\!2,,-Nc<l>f I  (4-47)  (4-48)  (4-49)  (4-50)  TIle nn s voltage at the terminnls of the ma chine will depend on whether the stator  is Y- or .1.-connected. I fthe ma chine is V-connected, the
n the tenninal voltage will  be V3 times E A ; if the ma chine is .1.-connected, then the tenninal voltage will just  be equal to EA.  Example 4-2. The following information is known about the simple two-pole  generator in Figure 4--16. The peak flux density of the rotor ma g netic field is 0.2 T, and the  mechanical rate of rotation of the shaft is 3600 r/min. The stator diameter of the machine is  0.5 m , its coil length is 0.3 m, and there are 151lU1ls per coil. The machine is V-connected.  (
a) What are the three phase voltages of the generator as a ftmction of time?  (b) What is the nns phase voltage of this generator?  (c) What is the nns tenninal voltage of this generator?  Solutioll  The flux in this machine is given by  <P = 2rlB = dlB  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 255  where d is the diameter and I is the length of the coil. Therefore, the flux in the machine is  given by  <p = (0.5 mXO.3 m)(0.2 T) = 0.03 \Vb  The speed of the rotor is given by  w = (3600 r/minX27T radXI minl60
 s) = 377 radls  (a) The magnitudes of the peak. phase voltages are thus  Emu = Nc<P w  = (15 turnsXO.03 Wb) (377 radls) = 169.7 V  and the three phase voltages are  e"".(t) = 169.7 sin 377t V  ebb.(t) = 169.7 sin (377t-1200) V  e,At) = 169.7 sin (377t- 240°) V  (b) The nns phase voltage of this generator is  Ell = E~x = 16~V = 120V  (c) Since the generator is V-connected,  VT = v'5EIl = 0(120 V ) = 208 V  4.5 INDU CED TORQUE IN AN AC MACHINE  In ac machines under nonnaI operating conditions, th
ere are two magnetic fields  present--.:1. ma gnetic field from the rotor circuit and another ma gnetic field from  the stator circuit. Th e interaction of these two ma gnetic fields produces the torque  in the ma chine, just as two pennan ent ma gnets near each other will experience a  torque which causes them to line up.  Figure 4-17 show s a simplified ac ma chine with a sinusoidal stator flux dis­ tribution that peaks in the upward direction and a single coil of wire m ounted on  the rotor. 
TIle stator flux distribution in this ma chine is  B s<,.a ) = Bs sin a (4-51)  where B s is the ma gnitude of the peak flux density; B :!..a ) is positive when the flux  density vector points radially outward from the rotor surface to the stator surface.  H ow mu ch torque is produced in the rotor of this simplified ac ma chine? To find  out, w e will analyze the force and torque on each of the two conductors separately.  Th e induced force on conductor I is  F = i(l x B )  = ilBs sin a  Th e t
orque on the conductor is  "TiDd.] = (r x F)  = rilBs sin a  w ith direction as shown  counterclockwise  (1-43)  256 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  a  IUia)1 '" Bs sin a  ""GURE4 -17  A simplified ac machine with a sinusoidal sta.tor flux distribution a.nd a single coil of wire mounted  in the rotor.  TIle induced force on conductor 2 is  F = i(lxB)  = ilBs sin a  TIle torque on the conductor is  1";oo.t = (r x F)  = rilBs sin a  with direction as shown  counterclockwise  TIlerefore, the torqu
e on the rotor loop is  l1"ind = 2rilBs sin a counterclockwise I  (1-43)  (4-52)  Equation (4-52) can be expressed in a more convenient fonn by examining  Figure 4-18 and noting two facts:  I. The current i flowing in the rotor coil produces a ma gnetic field of its own.  The direction of the peak of this ma gnetic field is given by the right-hand  rule, and the ma gnitude of its ma gnetizing intensity HR is directly propor­ tional to the current flowing in the rotor:  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT AL
S 257  FIGU RE 4- 18  B, , , , , , , ,  \ II .. ,  '-j<" _ f a  _"'-----l__ _ ____ _  , , , , , ,  I I1~ HR  r= 180" - a  Th e components magnetic flux density inside Ihe machine of Figure 4--17.  H R = Ci  where C is a constant of proportionality.  (4-53)  2. 1lle angle between the peak of the stator flux density Bs and the peak of the  rotor ma gnetizing intensity HR is y. Furthennore,  y=180 o -a  sin y= sin (180° _a) = sin 0:  (4-54)  (4-55)  B y combining these two observations, the torque 
on the loop can be expressed as  "Tioo = KH I13s sin a counterclockwise (4-56)  where K is a constant dependent on the construction of the ma chine. N ote that both  the ma gnitude and the direction of the torque can be expressed by the equation  I "Tind - KHR X B s I (4-57)  Finally, since B R = /LH R, this equation can be reexpressed as  (4-58)  where k = K Ip. N ote that in general k will not be constant, since the ma gnetic per­ m eability p varies with the amount of ma gnetic saturation in 
the ma chine.  Equation (4--58) is just the sam e as Equation (4--20), which we derived for the  case of a single loop in a unifonn ma gnetic field. It can apply to any ac ma chine, not  258 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  just to the simple one-loop rotor just described. Only the constant k will differ from  ma chine to ma chine. This equation will be used only for a qualitative study of  torque in ac machines, so the actual val ue of k is unimportant for our purposes.  TIle net ma gnetic fiel
d in this ma chine is the vector sum of the rotor and sta­ tor fields (assumin g no saturation):  B ... , = BR + Bs (4-59)  TIlis fact can be used to produce an equivalent (and sometimes more useful) ex­ pression for the induced torque in the ma chine. From Equation (4-58)  "TiDd = kB R X Bs  But from Equation (4-59), Bs = B De , - BR, so  "Tind = kBR X (BDe , - BR )  = k(BR x B"",) - k(BR x BR)  Since the cross prOOuct of any vector with itself is zero, this reduces to  (4-58)  (4-60)  so the i
nduced torque can also be expressed as a cross product of BR and B De , with  the sam e constant k as before. The ma gnitude of this expression is  (4-61)  where /j is the angle between BR and B ... ,.  Equations (4-58) to (4-61) will be used to help develop a qualitative un­ derstanding of the torque in ac ma chines. For example, look at the simple syn­ chronous ma chine in Figure 4-19. Its ma gnetic fields are rotating in a counter­ clockwise direction. What is the direction of the torque on t
he shaft of the  ma chine's rotor? By applying the right-hand rule to Equation (4-58) or (4-60),  the induced torque is found to be clockwise, or opposite the direction of rotation  of the rotor. Therefore, this machine mu st be acting as a generator.  4.6 WINDING INSULATION IN AN  ACMACHINE  One of the mo st critical parts of an ac ma chine design is the insulation of its wind­ ings. If the insulation of a m otor or generator breaks down, the ma chine shorts  out. The repair ofa ma chine with s
horted insulation is quite expensive, ifit is even  possible. To prevent the winding insulation from breaking down as a result of  overheating, it is necessary to limit the temp erature of the windings. TIlis can be  partially done by providing a cooling air circulation over them , but ultimately the  maximum winding temperature limits the maximum power that can be supplied  continuously by the ma chine.  w  <8>  0,  , , , , , ,  r !  B,  , , , ,  ACMACHINERYFUNDAMENTALS 259  FlGURE 4-19  A simp
lified synchronous machine showing  its rotor and stator m agnetic fields.  Insulation rarely fails from immediate breakdown at some critical tempera­ ture. Instead, the increase in temperature produces a gradual degradation of the in­ sulation, making it subject to failure from another cause such as shock, vibration,  or electrical stress. 1l1ere was an old rule of thumb that said that the life ex­ pectancy of a m otor with a given type of insulation is halved for each 10 percent  rise in tempe
rature above the rated temperature of the winding. This rule still ap­ plies to some extent today.  To standardize the temperature limits of ma chine insulation, the National  Electrical Manufa cturers A ssociation (NEMA ) in the United States has defined a  series of insulation system classes. Each insulation system class specifies the  ma ximum temperature rise pennissible for that class of insulation. 1l1ere are three  comm on NEMA insulation classes for integral-horsepow er ac m otors: 8, F,
 and  H . Each class represents a higher pennissible winding temperature than the one  before it. For example, the annature winding temperature rise above ambient tem­ perature in one type of continuously operating ac induction motor mu st be limited  to 80°C for class 8, 105°C for class F, and 125°C for class H insulation.  Th e effect of operating temperatu re on insulation life for a typical ma chine  can be quite dramatic. A typical curve is show n in Figure 4-20. This curve show s  the m ea
n life of a ma chine in thousands of hours versus the temperature of the  windings, for several different insulation classes.  Th e specific temperature specifications for each type of ac m otor and gen­ erator are set out in great detail in NEMA Standard MG 1-1993, Motors and Gen­ erators. Similar standards have been defined by the International Electrotechnical  Commission (IEC) and by various national standards organizations in other  countries.  ~  <  B u g  ~  '--... i'- ~  ""  8  ------"'-
 1\ 0  ~  \  '--... i'- 1\  ~ 0 , N , •  0 ~ M  • ,  ij ~  ""  ~  ------ 1\ ~  ~ g  \  0  00  \  ~  8 0 ~  spuemoljlll! SJIloH  260  AC MA C HINERY FUND A MENT ALS 261  4.7 AC MACHINE POWER FLOWS  AND LOSSES  AC generators take in m echanical power and produce electric power, while ac  motors take in electric pow er and produce me chanical power. In either case, not  all the power input to the ma chine appears in useful form at the other end- there  is always some loss associated with the proces
s.  Th e efficiency of an ac ma chine is defined by the equation  ?"UI  " ~ - X 100%  P in  (4-62)  Th e difference between the input power and the output power of a ma chine is the  losses that occur inside it. lllerefore,  (4-63)  The Losses in AC Machines  Th e losses that occur in ac ma chines can be divided into four basic categories:  I. Electrical or copper losses (/2R losses)  2. Core losses  3. Mec hanical losses  4. Stray load losses  ELECTRICAL OR COPPER LOSSES. C opper losses are the
 resistive heating losses  that occur in the stator (annature) and rotor (field) windings of the ma chine. TIle sta­ tor copper losses (SCL) in a three-phase ac ma chine are given by the equation  (4-64)  w here IA is the current flow ing in each annature phase and Rio. is the resistance of  each armature phase.  Th e rotor copper losses (RCL ) of a synchronous ac ma chine (induction ma­ chines will be considered separately in Chapter 7) are given by  (4-65)  w here IF is the current flow ing in
 the field winding on the rotor and RF is the re­ sistance of the field winding. Th e resistance used in these calculations is usually  the winding resistance at nonnal operating temperature.  CO RE LO SSES . Th e core losses are the hysteresis losses and eddy current losses  occurring in the m etal of the m otor. Th ese losses were described in Chapter I.  262 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  TIlese losses vary as the square of the flux density (8 2) and, for the stator, as the  l.5th power of 
the speed of rotation of the ma gnetic fields (nI.5).  MECHANICAL LOSSES. The me chanical losses in an ac ma chine are the losses  associated with me chanical effects. Th ere are two basic types of me chanical  losses: friction and windage. Friction losses are losses caused by the friction of the  bearings in the ma chine, while windage losses are caused by the friction between  the m oving parts of the ma chine and the air inside the m otor's casing. TIlese  losses vary as the cube of the speed
 of rotation of the ma chine.  TIle mechanical and core losses ofa ma chine are often lumped together and  called the no-load rotationnlloss of the ma chine. At no load, all the input power  mu st be used to overcom e these losses. Th erefore, mea suring the input power to  the stator of an ac ma chine acting as a motor at no load will give an approximate  value for these losses.  ST RAY LOSSES (OR MISCELLANEOUS LOSSES ). Stray losses are losses that  cannot be placed in one of the previous cate
gories. No matter how carefully losses  are accounted for, som e always escape inclusion in one of the above categories.  All such losses are lumped into stray losses. For most ma chines, stray losses are  taken by convention to be I percent of full load.  The Power-Flow Diagram  One of the mo st convenient techniques for accounting for power losses in a ma­ chine is the power-flow diagram. A power-flow diagram for an ac generator is  show n in Figure 4-21 a. In this figure, m echanical power is
 input into the ma chine,  and then the stray losses, me chanical losses, and core loses are subtracted. After  they have been subtracted, the remaining power is ideally converted from me­ chanical to electrical fonn at the point labeled P <X>f!¥' TIle m echanical power that is  converted is given by  (4-66)  and the same amount of electrical power is produced. H owever, this is not the  power that appears at the ma chine's terminals. Before the tenninals are reached,  the electrical12R losses m
u st be subtracted.  In the case of ac m otors, this power-flow diagram is simply reversed. Th e  power-flow diagram for a m otor is show n in Figure 4-21 b.  Exampl e problems involving the calculation of ac motor and generator effi­ ciencies will be given in the next three chapters.  4.8 VOLTAGE REGULATION AND SPEED  REGULATION  Generators are often compared to each other using a figure of m erit called voltage  regulation. Voltage regulation (V R ) is a m easure of the ability of a generator 
to  keep a constant voltage at its terminals as load varies. It is defmed by the equation  Stray  losses losses  Pi. '" 3V.JA cos 6  '" ..fjVdL cos 6  I  PR losses  FIGURE 4-21  C~  losses  (a)  Core  ACMAC HI NERYFUNDAMENTALS 263  PR losses  P 00' ",3V.1.ot cos 60r  ..fjVdL cos 6  losses losses  ,b,  (a) The power-flow diagram of a three-phase ac generator. (b) The power-flow diagram of a three­ phase ac motor.  I VR = v..l Vfl Vfl X 1 00% I (4-67)  where V.t is the no-load tenninal voltage of 
the generator and Vfl is the full-load  tenninal voltage of the generator. It is a rough m easure of the shape of the gener­ ator's voltage-current characteristic-a positive voltage regulation m eans a  drooping characteristic, and a negative voltage regulation m eans a rising charac­ teristic. A small VR is "better" in the sense that the voltage at the tenninals of the  generator is m ore constant with variations in load.  Similarly, m otors are often compared to each other by using a figure of
  m erit called speed regulation. Speed regulation (SR ) is a measure of the ability of  a motor to keep a constant shaft speed as load varies. It is defined by the equation  100% 1 (4-68)  x (4-69)  264 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  It is a rough m easure of the shape of a m otor's torque-speed characteristic- ,  positive speed regulation m eans that a m otor's speed drops with increasing load,  and a negative speed regulation m eans a m otor's speed increases with increasing  load. TIle ma 
gnitude of the speed regulation tells approximately how steep the  slope of the torque-speed curve is.  4.9 SUMMARY  Th ere are two major types of ac ma chines: synchronous ma chines and induction  ma chines. Th e principal difference between the two types is that synchronous ma­ chines require a dc field current to be supplied to their rotors, while induction ma­ chines have the field current induced in their rotors by transfonner action. TIley  will be explored in detail in the next three chap
ters.  A three-phase system of currents supplied to a system of three coi Is spaced  120 electrical degrees apart on a stator wi ll produce a unifonn rotating ma gnetic  field within the stator. Th e direction of rotation of the ma gnetic field can be re­ versed by simply swapping the connections to any two of the three phases. Con­ versely, a rotating ma gnetic field wi II produce a three-phase set of voltages within  such a set of coils.  In stators of m ore than two poles, one complete m echa
nical rotation of the  ma gnetic fields produces more than one complete electrical cycle. For such a sta­ tor, one me chanical rotation produces PI2 electrical cycles. Therefore, the electri­ cal angle of the voltages and currents in such a ma chine is related to the me chan­ ical angle of the ma gnetic fields by  P  (J~ = "2(Jm  TIle relationship between the electrical frequency of the stator and the me chanical  rate of rotation of the ma gnetic fields is  ".p  f~ = 120  TIle types of losses t
hat occur in ac ma chines are electrical or copper losses  (PR losses), core losses, m echanical losses, and stray losses. E.1.ch of these losses  was described in this chapter, along with the definition of overall ma chine effi­ ciency. Finally, voltage regulation was defined for generators as  1 VR = Vol V Il  VIl x 100%1  and speed regulation was defined for motors as  ISR = nal nn  nil x 100%1  ACMAC HINERYFUND A MENT ALS 265  QUESTIONS  4-1. What is the principal difference between a synchr
onous machine and an induction  machine?  4-2. Why does sw itching the current flows in any two phases reverse the direction of ro­ tation of a stator's magnetic field?  4-3, What is the relationship between electrical frequency and magnetic field speed for  an ac machine?  4-4. What is the equation for the induced torque in an ac machine ?  PROBLEMS  4-1. The simple loop rotating in a lUlifonn magnetic field shown in Figure 4--1 has the  following characteristics:  B =0 .5Ttotheright r = O.lm  
l = 0.5 m w = 103 radls  (a) Calculate the voltage elOl(f) induced in this rotating loop.  (b) Suppose that a 5-0 resistor is COIlllected as a load across the terminals of the  loop. Calculate the current that would flow through the resistor.  (c) Calculate the magnitude and direction of the induced torque on the loop for  the conditions in b.  (d) Calculate the electric power being generated by the loop for the conditions in b.  (e) Calculate the mechanical power being consumed by the loop for 
the conditions  in b. H ow does this nwnber compare to the amount of electric power being gen­ erated by the loop?  4-2. Develop a table showing the speed of magnetic field rotation in ac machines of 2, 4,  6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 poles operating at frequencies of 50, 60, and 400 H z.  4-3. A three-phase, four-pole winding is installed in 12 slots on a stator. There are 40  turns of wire in each slot of the windings. All coils in each phase are cOIlllected in  series, and the three phases are conne
cted in.6.. The flux per pole in the machine is  0.060 Wh, and the speed of rotation of the magnetic field is 1800 rhnin.  (a) What is the frequency of the voltage produced in this winding?  (b) What are the resulting phase and tenninal voltages of this stator?  4-4. A three-phase, Y-COIlllected, 50-Hz , two-pole synchronous machine has a stator with  2()(x) turns of wire per phase. What rotor flux would be required to produce a tenni­ nal (line-to-line) voltage of 6 kV ?  4-5. Modify the MATLAB
 problem in Example 4--1 by swapping the currents flowing in  any two phases. What happens to the resulting net magnetic field?  4-6. If an ac machine has the rotor and stator magnetic fields shown in Figure P4--1, what  is the direction of the induced torque in the machine? Is the machine acting as a mo­ tor or generator?  4-7. The flux density distribution over the surface of a two-pole stator of radius rand  length l is given by  B = BMCO s(W.,f-a)  Prove that the total flux lUlder each pole 
face is  (4--37b)  266 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  H, B ••  0  ,  0  ,  0 , , , ,  y  , ,  w B,  o  ""G UR E 1)~- 1  The ac machine of Problem 4--6.  4--8. In the early days of ac m otor develop m ent. m achine designers had great difficulty  controlling the core losses (hysteresis and eddy currents) in m achines. Th ey had not  yet developed steels w ith low hysteresis. and we re not making lamin ations as thin  as the ones used today. To help control these losses. early ac m otors i
n the United  States we re run from a 25-H z ac powe r supply. w hile lighting system s we re run  from a separale 60-H z ac powe r supply.  (a) D evelop a table show ing the speed of magnetic field rotation in ac m achines of  2.4.6.8. 10. 12. and 14 poles operating at 25 H z. Wh at was the fastest rota­ tional speed available to these early m otors?  (b) For a given m otor operating at a constant flux density B , how wo uld the core  losses of the m otor flmning at 25 H z comp are to the core 
losses of the m otor  nmnin g at 60 H z?  (c) Wh y did the early engineers provide a separate 60-H z power system for lighting?  R E FE REN C E S  I. De l Toro. Vincent. Electric M achines and P o .... er Systetru. E nglewood Cliffs. N .J.: Prentice-H alt.  1985.  2. Fitzgerald. A. E.. and Charles K ingsley. Electric Machinery. New York: M cGraw-H ill. 1952.  3. Fitzgerald. A. E.. Charles K ingsley. and S. D . U mans. Electric M achinery. 5th ed .. New York:  M cGraw-H ill. 1990.  4. Internation
al Electrotechnical Commission. Rotating Electrical Machines Part I: Rating and  Perfortnllnce. IEC 34-1 (R I994). 1994.  5. Liwschitz-Garik. M ichael. and Clyde Whipple. Altunating-Current M achinery. Princeton. N .J.:  Van Nostrand. 1961.  6. M cPherson. George. An Introduction to Electrical Machines and Transformers. New Yort: Wiley.  1981.  7. National E lectrical M anufacturers Association. M otors and Gl'nerators, Publication M G 1-1993.  W ashington. D .C.. 1993.  8. W erninck. E. H . (ed
.). Electric Motor Handbook. London: M cGraw-H ill. 1978.  C H A PT ER  5  SYN C HR O N OUS  GE N ER ATO R S  S ynchronous generators or alternntors are synchronous ma chines used to con­ vert m echanical power to ac electric power. This chapter explores the opera­ tion of synchronous generators, both when operating alone and when operating to­ gether with other generators.  5.1 SY N C HR O N OUS GE N E R ATO R  C ON ST R UCT ION  In a synchronous generator, a de current is applied to the rotor 
winding, which  produces a rotor ma gnetic field. Th e rotor of the generator is then turned by a  prime m over, producing a rotating ma gnetic field within the ma chine. This rotat­ ing ma gnetic field induces a three-phase set of voltages within the stator windings  of the generator.  Tw o terms comm only used to describe the windings on a ma chine arefield  windings and armature w indings. In general, the tenn "field windings" applies to  the windings that produce the main ma gnetic field in 
a ma chine, and the term  "armature windings" applies to the windings where the main voltage is induced.  For synchronous ma chines, the field windings are on the rotor, so the tenns "rotor  windings" and "field windings" are used interchangeably. Similarly, the term s  "stator windings" and "annature windings" are used interchangeably.  T he rotor of a synchronous generator is essentially a large electromagnet.  T he ma gnetic poles on the rotor can be of either salient or nonsalient constructi
on.  T he tenn salient mean s "protruding" or "sticking out," and a salient pole is a ma g­ netic pole that sticks out from the surface of the rotor. On the other hand, a  267  268 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  o  0,  s  End View Side View  fo'IGURE 5-1  A non salient two-pole rotor for a synchronous machine.  nonsalient pole is a ma gnetic pole constructed flush with the surface of the rotor.  A nonsalient-pole rotor is show n in Figure 5-1, while a salient-pole rotor is show n  in Figure 5-
2. No nsalient-pole rotors are nonnally used for two- and four-pole ro­ tors, while salient-pole rotors are nonnally used for rotors with four or m ore poles.  B ecause the rotor is subjected to changing ma gnetic fields, it is constructed of thin  laminations to reduce eddy current losses.  A de current mu st be supplied to the field circuit on the rotor. Since the ro­ tor is rotating, a special arrangement is required to get the de power to its field  windings. Th ere are two comm on approache
s to supplying this dc power:  I. Supply the dc power from an external dc source to the rotor by mean s of slip  rings and brushes.  2. Supply the dc power from a special de power source m ounted directly on the  shaft of the synchronous generator.  Slip rings are m etal rings completely encircling the shaft of a ma chine but in­ sulated from it. One end of the dc rotor winding is tied to each of the two slip rings  on the shaft of the synchronous ma chine. and a stationary brush rides on each s
lip  ring. A "brush" is a block of graphitelike carbon comp ound that conducts electric­ ity freely but has very low friction. so that it doesn't wear down the slip ring. If the  positive end of a dc voltage source is connected to one brush and the negative end  is connected to the other, then the same dc voltage wi II be app lied to the field wind­ ing at all times regardless of the angu lar position or speed of the rotor.  Slip rings and brushes create a few problem s when they are used to sup
ply  dc power to the field windings of a synchronous ma chine. TIley increase the  amount of maintenance required on the ma chine, since the brushes mu st be  checked for wear regularly. In addition, brush voltage drop can be the cause of  significant power losses on ma chines with larger field currents. Despite these  problem s, slip rings and brushes are used on all smaller synchronous ma chines,  because no other method of supplying the dc field current is cost-effective.  On larger generator
s and mot ors, brnshless exciters are used to supply the  dc field current to the ma chine. A brushless exciter is a small ac generator with its  (a)  HGURE  5-2  Slip  rings  (a)  A  salient six-pole rotor for a synchronous  ntachine. (b) Photograph  of  a sa li ent eight-pole  synchronous ntachine rotor showing the windings  on the individual rotor poles.  (Courtesy  of  Geneml Electric Company.)  (e) Photograph  of  a single  S3.lie nt  pole front a rotor with the  fi eld  SYNCHRONOUS GENERAT
ORS  269  ,b,  ,d,  windings not yet  in  place.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  E lectric Compan y.)  (d) A single salient pole shown  after the  fi e ld  windings are installed but before it  is  mounted on the rotor.  (Courtesy ofWestinglwuse  Electric Company.)  field c ir cuit m ounted on the stator and  it s armature circ uit  m o unt ed on the rotor  shaft. The three-phase output of the exciter generator is rectified to direct current  by  a three-phase rectifier circuit also m ounted on the shaft 
of the generator, and is  then  fed  into the main dc field circ uit.  B y controlling  th e small dc  fi e ld  curre nt  of  th e exciter generator (located on  the  stator),  it  is possible to adjust the  fi e ld  current  on the m a in  ma chine  without slip rings and brushes.  This arrangement is shown  schematically  in  Fi gure  5-3,  and a synchronous ma chine rotor with a  bru s hl ess  exciter m o unt ed on the same shaft is shown in  Fi g ur e 5-4. S in ce no me chanical  contacts ev
er occ ur  between  th e rotor and  th e stato r,  a brus hl ess exciter requires  mu ch less mainte nan ce than slip rings and brushes.   270  ELE CT R IC M AC HI NERY  RJND A MENT ALS  Exciter  Ex citer armature  :L  Three-phase  rectifier  r  ,  ,  ,  ,  I"  ---,- Synchronous  machine  M ain Field  -----------------~-------------+---------------- N  ~ _h  Three-phase  input (low current)  ""G UR E 5 -3  fu  ,  citer  ,ld  fi  ,------,  Th ree-phase  output  M aln annature  A brush less excite
r circuit. A small thrre-phase current  is  rectified and used to supply the field circuit  of  the exciter. which is located on the stator.  Th e output  of  the armature cirwit  of  the exciter  (on  the  rotor) is then rectified and used to supply the field current  of  the main machine.  ""G UR E 5-4  Photograph  of  a synchronous machine rotor with a brush less exciter mounted on the same shaft.  N otice the rectifying electronics visible next to the armature  of  the exciter. (Courtesy  of
  W estinghouse Electric Company.)   P ilot exciter  Pilot exciter  field  Permanent  magnets  I I I  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 271  Ex citer  ,  I Synchronous  : generator  ,  ,  Ex citer armature ----I-M ain field ,  ,  ,  ,  Th~ ,  ph~  ,  ,  rectifier ,  ,  ,  ,  --r-,  --~-----------~----------~----------r-------------------- I Three-phase"  Pllot eXCl1er  annature  FIGURE 5-5  Threo·  ph~  rectifier  , rO~"='~P"~'~~==+ 'I ~\ -4  R,  ,  ,  -t- Ex cIter  field  M ain armature  A brushless exc
itation scheme that includes a pilot exciter. Th e permanent magnets of the pilot exciter  produce the field current of the exciter. which in turn produces the field current of the main machine.  To make the excitation of a generator completely independent of any exter­ nal power sources, a small pilot exciter is often included in the system. Apilot ex­ citer is a small ac generator with permanent magnets m ounted on the rotor shaft  and a three-phase winding on the stator. It produces the power
 for the field circuit  of the exciter, which in turn controls the field circuit of the main ma chine. I f a  pilot exciter is included on the generator shaft, then no external electric power is  required to run the generator (see Figure 5-5).  Many synchronous generators that include brushless exciters also have slip  rings and brushes, so that an auxiliary source of dc field current is available in  emergencies.  Th e stator of a synchronous generator has already been described in Chap­ ter 4,
 and m ore details of stator construction are found in Appendix B. Synchro­ nous generator stators are nonnally mad e of prefonned stator coils in a double­ layer winding. Th e winding itself is distributed and chorded in order to reduce the  hannonic content of the output voltages and currents, as described in Appendix B.  A cutaway diagram of a complete large synchronous ma chine is show n in  Figure 5-6. This drawing shows an eight-pole salient-pole rotor, a stator with dis­ tributed double-l
ayer windings, and a brushless exciter.  272  ELECTRIC M AC HINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  "" GU R E  5-6  A cutaway diagram  of  a large synchronous machine. N ote the saliem·pole construction and the on·  shaft exciter. (Courtesy ofGl'neral Electric Company.)  5.2 THE SPEED  OF  ROTATION  OF  A  SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR  Synchronous generators are  by  defmition synchronous, meaning that the elec tri cal  frequency produced is loc ked  in  or synchronized with the m echanical rate of  rotation of the gene
rato r.  A synchronous  ge nerat or's  rotor consists  of  an  electro­ ma gnet to which direct current is supplied.  TIl e rotor's ma gne ti c field points  in  w hatever direction the rotor is turned. Now ,  th e rate  of  rotation  of  th e  ma gne ti c  fields  in  the  ma chine is related  to  the  stator electrical frequency  by  Equation  (4-34):  (4-34)  where  !.  =  electrical frequen cy,  in H z  nm  =  me chanical speed  of  ma gne ti c  fi eld,  in  r/min  (equals speed of  rotor fo
r synchronous ma chines)  P =  number of  po les  Since the rotor turns  at  the  sa me  speed as the ma gne ti c field, this equation relates  the speed  of  rotor rotation to the resulting electrical frequency. Elec tri c power is  generated  at  50 or 60 H z,  so  th e generator  mu st turn  at  a  fi xed speed depending on  th e numb er of  po les on the ma c hin e. For  exa mple, to generate 60-H z power  in  a  tw o-pole ma chine, the rotor must turn  at  3600 r/min.  To  generate 50-H z p
ower  in  a four-pole ma chine, the rotor must turn at 1500  rIm  in. TIle required rate of rota­ ti on for a given frequency can always  be  calc ul ated from Equation  (4-34).   ;  ,,'  FIGURE 5-7  SY N C HR O N OUS G ENE RATORS 273  '" '" "")'DC (constant)  ..-- ,b,  (a) Plot of flux versus field current for a synchronous generator. (b) The magnetization curve for the  synchronous generator.  5.3 THE INTERNAL GENERATED VOLTAGE  OFASYNCHRONOUSGENERATOR  In Chapler 4, the ma gnitude of the volt
age induced in a given stator phase was  found to be  (4-50)  This voltage depends on the flux ~ in the ma chine, the frequency or speed of ro­ lation, and the ma chine's construction. In solving problem s with synchronous ma ­ chines, this equation is som etimes rewritten in a simpler fonn that emphasizes the  quantities that are variable during ma chine operalion. This simpler form is  I EA ~ K<J>w I (5-1)  w here K is a constant representing the construction of the ma chine. If w is ex­ press
ed in electrical radians per second, then  Nc  K ~ V2 (5-2)  w hile if w is expressed in mecha nical radians per second, then  Nc P  K ~ V2 (5-3)  Th e internal generated voltage EA is directly proportional to the flux and to  the speed, but the flux itself depends on the current flow ing in the rotor field cir­ cuit. The field circuit IF is related to the flux ~ in the manner show n in Fig­ ure 5-7a. Since EA is directly proportional to the flux, the internal generated volt­ age EA is related t
o the field current as show n in Figure 5-7b. lllis plot is called  the mag netization cUIYe or the open-circuit characteristic of the ma chine.  274 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  5.4 THE EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT OF A  SYNC HRONO US GENERATOR  Th e voltage EA is the internal generated voltage produced in one phase ofa syn­ chronous generator. H owev er, this voltage EA is not usually the voltage that ap­ pears at the terminals of the generator. In fact, the only time the internal voltage  EA is the
 sam e as the output voltage Vo/> of a phase is wh en there is no annature  current flowing in the ma chine. Why is the output voltage Vo/> from a phase not  equal to EA , and what is the relationship between the two voltages? TIle answer to  these questions yields the model of a synchronous generator.  TIlere are a number of factors that cause the difference between EA and Vo/>:  I, The distortion of the air-gap ma gnetic field by the current flowing in the sta- tor, called annature reaction.  
2, The self-inductance of the annature coils.  ), The resistance of the armature coils.  4, The effect of salient-pole rotor shapes.  W e will explore the effects of the first three factors and derive a ma chine mod el  from them. In this chapter, the effects of a salient-pole shape on the operation of a  synchronous ma chine will be ignored; in other w ords, all the ma chines in this  chapter are assumed to have nonsalient or cylindrical rotors. M aking this assump­ tion will cause the calculat
ed answers to be slightly inaccurate if a ma chine does  indeed have salient-pole rotors, but the errors are relatively minor. A discussion of  the effects of rotor pole saliency is inc1 uded in Appendix C.  TIle first effect mentioned, and nonnally the largest one, is armature reac­ tion. Wh en a synchronous generator's rotor is spun, a voltage EA is induced in the  generator's stator windings. If a load is attached to the terminals of the generator,  a current flows. But a three-phase stator c
urrent flow will produce a ma gnetic  field of its own in the ma chine. This stator ma gnetic field distorts the original ro­ tor ma gnetic field, changing the resulting phase voltage. This effect is called  armature reaction because the annature (stator) current affects the ma gnetic field  which produced it in the first place.  To understand annature reaction, refer to Figure 5--8. Figure 5--8a show s a  two-pole rotor spinning inside a three-phase stator. There is no load connected to  the st
ator. The rotor ma gnetic field DR produces an internal generated voltage EA  wh ose peak value coincides with the direction of DR. As wa s shown in the last  chapter, the voltage will be positive out of the conductors at the top and negative  into the conductors at the bottom of the figure. With no load on the generator,  there is no annature current flow, and EA will be equal to the phase voltage V o/>.  Now suppose that the generator is connected to a lagging load. Because the  load is laggin
g, the peak current wi ll occur at an angle behind the peak voltage.  TIlis effect is shown in Figure 5--8b.  TIle current flowing in the stator windings produces a ma gnetic field of its  own. This stator ma gnetic field is called D s and its direction is given by the right- o  E ' ",IOIX I  , ,  B,  ,,'  E ' ",IDiX I  ,  B, , ,  o  o , , 0  ,  , , , ,  FIGURE 5-8  ,  , D,  •  'e'  ". '. • '0 E ,., • '.  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 275  o  o  ,  D,  w  , , , ,  ,  ,b,  , , , ,  , v,  ,  I I ... JI
I>X  , '  o  .' I 'AJIIH , , '  --:::::]'0 " " ,  ,  D,  , , , ,  ,d,  ,  o  ~ E"" •  Th e development of a model for armature reaction: (a) A rotating magnetic field produces the  internal generated voltage EA' (b) The resulting voltage produces a lagging currentflow when  connected to a lagging load. (e) Th e stator current produces its own magnetic field BS' which  produces its own voltage E_ in the stator windings of the machine. (d) Th e field Us adds to "I/"  distorting it into H .... Th e
 voltage E ... adds to EA. producing v. at the output of the phase.  hand rule to be as show n in Figure 5--8c. Th e stator ma gnetic field B s produces a  voltage of its ow n in the stator, and this voltage is called E .... , on the figure.  With two voltages present in the stator windings, the total voltage in a phase  is just the sum of the internal generated voltage EA. and the annature reaction volt­ age E"a,:  (5-4)  Th e net ma gnetic field 8 ... , is just the sum of the rotor and stator 
ma gnetic fields:  (5-5)  276 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  FlGURES-9  A simple cirwit (see text).  Since the angles of EA and BR are the same and the angles of E"a. and Bs, are the  same , the resulting ma gnetic field Boe. will coincide with the net voltage Vo/>. The  resulting voltages and currents are show n in Figure 5--8d.  H ow can the effects of armature reaction on the phase voltage be mod eled?  First, note that the voltage E"a. lies at an angle of 90° behind the plane of maxi
­ mum current IA . Second, the voltage E."" is directly proportional to the current IA .  If X is a constant of proportionality, then the armature reaction voltage can be ex­ pressed as  E"., = - jXIA (5-6)  TIle voltage on a phase is thus  '"I Vc-.-_--oEo-A -_--cj XccI", 1  (5-7)  Look at the circuit show n in Figure 5-9. T he Kirchhoff's voltage law equa­ tion for this circuit is  (5-8)  TIlis is exactly the sam e equation as the one describing the annature reaction volt­ age. T herefore, the 
annature reaction voltage can be modeled as an inductor in  series with the internal generated voltage.  In addition to the effects of armature reaction, the stator coils have a self­ inductance and a resistance. I f the stator self-inductance is called LA (and its cor­ responding reactance is called XA ) while the stator resistance is called RA , then the  total difference betwccn EA and Vo/> is given by  (5-9)  TIle annature reaction effects and the self-inductance in the ma chine are both rep
­ resented by reactances, and it is customary to combi ne them into a single reac­ tance, called the synchronous reactance of the ma chine:  XS= X + XA  Th erefore, the final equation describing Vo/> is  I V4> - EA - jXSIA - RAIA I  (5- 10)  (5- 11 )  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 277  I"  +  jXs R,  +  E A ]  ""'  \' f]  I,  + I" R.,  +  R, jXs R,  v, +  EA 2  ""'  \' f2 (&)  L,  FIGURE 5-10  Th e full equivalent circuit of a three-phase synchronous generator.  II is now possible 10 sketch the equiv
alent circuit of a three-phase synchro­ nous generator. The full equivalent circuit of such a generator is shown in Fig­ ure 5- 10. This figure shows a dc power source supplying the rotor field circuit,  which is mod eled by the coil's inductance and resistance in series. In series with  RF is an adjustable resistor R adj which controls the flow of field current. The rest  of the equivalent circuit consists of the mod els for each phase. E:1.ch phase has an  internal generated voltage with a ser
ies inductance Xs (consisting of the sum of  the armature reactance and the coil's self-inductance) and a series resistance RA .  TIle voltages and currents of the three phases are 120° apart in angle, but other­ wise the three phases are identical.  TIlese three phases can be either Y- or Ii-connected as show n in Figure  5- 11. If they are Y-connected, then the tenninal voltage VT is related to the phase  voltage by  (5-12)  278 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  E.n + v,  v,  +  jXs  (a)  + ~ _
_____ C=~ ____ --Q+  jXs  v,  jXs  'bJ  ""GURE 5-11  The generator equivalent circuit connected in (a) Y and (b) 8.  I f they are a-connected, then  (5- 13)  TIle fact that the three phases of a synchronous generator are identical in all  respects except for phase angle nonnally leads to the use of a per-phase equiva­ lent circuit. The per-phase equivalent circuit of this ma chine is show n in Fig- SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 279  v,  FIGURE 5-12  Th e per-phase equivalent circuit of a synchronous 
generator. Th e internal field circuit resistance and  the external variable resistance have been contbin ed into a single resistor R r.  FIGURE 5-13  Th e phasor diagrant of a synchronous generator at unity power factor.  ure 5- 12. On e important fact mu st be kept in mind when the per-phase equivalent  circuit is used: Th e three phases have the sam e voltages and currents only when  the loads attached to them are balanced. If the generator's loads are not balanced,  m ore sophisticated techn
iques of analysis are required. 1l1ese techniques are be­ yond the scope of this book.  5.5 T H E PH ASO R DIAG R A M OF A  SY N C HR O N OUS GE N E R ATO R  Because the voltages in a synchronous generator are ac voltages, they are usually  expressed as phasors. Since phasors have both a ma gnitude and an angle, the re­ lationship between them mu st be expressed by a two-dimensional plot. When the  voltages within a phase (E,t, V 4n jXSIA, and RAIA) and the current IA in the phase  are plotted i
n such a fashion as to show the relationships among them, the result­ ing plot is called a phasor diagram.  For example, Figure 5- 13 shows these relationships when the generator is  supplying a load at unity power factor (a purely resistive load). From Equation  (5- 11 ), the total voltage E,t differs from the tenninal voltage of the phase V 4> by  the resistive and inductive voltage drops. All voltages and currents are referenced  to V 4n which is arbitrarily assumed to be at an angle of 0°.  
This phasor diagram can be compa red to the phasor diagrams of generators  operating at lagging and leading power factors. 1l1ese phasor diagrams are show n  280 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  V, jXSIA  lARA  ,,'  E,  jXSIA  lARA  V,  ,b,  ""GURE 5-14  The phasor diagram of a synchronous generator at (3) lagging and (b) leading power factor.  in Figure 5- 14. N otice that, for a given phase voltage and armnture current, a  larger internal generated voltage EA is needed for lagging loads than
 for leading  loads. Th erefore, a larger field current is needed with lagging loads to get the  same tenninal voltage, because  (5- 1)  and w mu st be constant to keep a constant frequency.  Alternatively, for a given field current and magnitude of load current, the  terminal voltage is lower for lagging loads and higher for leading loads.  In real synchronous ma chines, the synchronous reactance is nonnally mu ch  larger than the winding resistance RA, so R A is often neglected in the qualitat
ive  study of voltage variations. For accurate numerical results, R A mu st of course be  considered.  5.6 POWE R A ND TO RQUE IN  SY NC HR O NOUS GE NERATO RS  A synchronous generator is a synchronous ma chine used as a generator. It con­ verts m echanical power to three-phase electrical power. Th e source of me chanical  power, the prime mover, ma y be a diesel engine, a stearn turbine, a water turbine,  or any similar device. Whatev er the source, it mu st have the basic property that its  sp
eed is almost constant regardless of the power demand. If that were not so, then  the resulting power system 's frequency would wander.  Not all the m echanical power going into a synchronous generator becomes  electrical power out of the ma chine.llle difTerence between input power and output  power represents the losses of the ma chine. A power-flow diagram for a synchro- SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 281  p~= foppw..  Stray  losses  FIGU R E 5-15  windage  losses  ,  ,  find w.. I ,  losses  ,  , 
 ,  (copper losses)  The power-flow diagram of a synchronous generntor.  nous generator is show n in Figure 5- 15. T he input me chanical power is the shaft  power in the generator fln = "Tappwm, while the power converted from m echanical  to electrical fonn internally is given by  = 3E,./1t cos "y  (5-14)  (5-15)  where 'Y is the angle between Elt and lit-TIle difference between the input power  to the generator and the power converted in the generator represents the m echan­ ical, core, and st
ray losses of the ma chine.  TIle real electrical output power of the synchronous generator can be ex­ pressed in line quantities as  and in phase quantities as  ?"UI = 3'4,IA cos (J  Th e reactive power output can be expressed in line quantities as  Q,UI = ~VTIL sin (J  or in phase quantities as  (5-16)  (5-17)  (5-18)  (5-19)  If the annature resistance RIt is ignored (since X s» RIt), then a very useful  equation can be derived to approximate the output power of the generator. To de­ rive thi
s equation, examine the phasor diagram in Figure 5- 16. Figure 5- 16 shows  a simplified phasor diagram of a generator with the stator resistance ignored. N o­ tice that the vertical segm ent be can be expressed as either Elt sin /j or Xs lit cos (J.  T herefore,  EA sin /j  lA cos (J = X ,  282 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  , o r  ""GURE 5-16  """, " , , , , ............ 1:;' ,  , , ,  , ,  "  ,  ,  jXs l,t I  ,  ,  ,  V ,  • ___ L.L  " b ,  Simplified phasor diagram with armature resistance
 ignored.  and substituting this expression into Equation (5- 17) gives  E,t sin.s  =Xs l,tcos(}  (5-20)  Since the resistances are assumed to be zero in Equation (5-20), there are no elec­ trical losses in this generator, and this equation is both PCOII¥ and Pout.  Equation (5-20) shows that the power produced by a synchronous genera­ tor depends on the angle 8 between Vq,and E A. The angle 8 is known as the torque  angle of the ma chine. Notice also that the maximum power that the generator ca
n  supply occurs when 8 = 900. At 8 = 90°, sin 8 = I, and  (5-21)  TIle maximum power indicated by this equation is called the static stability limit  of the generator. Nonnally, real generators never even com e close to that limit.  Full-load torque angles of 15 to 20° are m ore typical of real ma chines.  Now take another loo k at Equations (5- 17), (5- 19), and (5-20). IfVq, is as­ sumed constant, then the real power output is directly prop011ionni to the quanti­ ties J,t cos () and E,t sin 8
, and the reactive power output is directly proportional to  the quantity J,t sin (). The se facts are useful in plotting phasor diagrams of syn­ chronous generators as loads change.  From Chapter 4, the induced torque in this generator can be expressed as  (4-58)  or as  (4-60)  SY N C HR O N OUS G ENE RATORS 283  Th e magnitude of Eq uation (4--60) can be expressed as  Tind = kB,/J"", sin /j (4-61)  w here /j is the angle between the rotor and net ma gnetic fields (the so-called  torque angle)
. Since B R produces the voltage E ... and B Oel produces the voltage V o/>.  the angle /j between E ... and V 0/> is the same as the angle /j between BR and B _.  An alternative expression for the induced torque in a synchronous generator  can be derived from Equation (5-20). B ecause P C<JO¥ = TiDd W m • the induced torque  can be expressed as  (5-22)  This expression describes the induced torque in terms of electrical quantities,  w hereas Eq uation (4--60) gives the same infonnation in terms
 of ma gnetic  quantities.  5.7 MEASURING SYNCHRONOUS  GENERATOR MODEL PARAMETERS  Th e equivalent circuit of a synchronous generator that has been derived contains  three quantities that mu st be detennined in order to completely describe the be­ havior of a real synchronous generator:  I. The relationship between field current and nux (and therefore between the  field current and E ... )  2. 1lle synchronous reactance  3. 1lle annature resistance  This section describes a simple technique for 
determining these quantities in a  synchronous generator.  Th e first step in the process is to perfonn the open-circuit test on the gener­ ator. To perform this test, the generator is turned at the rated speed, the terminals  are disconnected from all loads, and the field current is set to zero. 1llen the field  current is gradually increased in steps, and the tenninal voltage is mea sured at each  step along the way. With the tenninals open, I ... = 0, so E ... is equal to ~. It is thus  possi
ble to construct a plot of E ... or V r versus IF from this information. This plot is  the so-cal led open-circuit characteristic (OCC) of a generator. With this character­ istic, it is possible to fmd the internal generated voltage of the generator for any  given field currenl. A typical open-circuit characteristic is shown in Figure 5-17a.  N otice that at first the curve is almost perfectly linear, until some saturation is ob­ served at high field currents. The unsaturated iron in the frame o
f the synchronous  ma chine has a reluctance several thousand times lowe r than the air-gap reluctance,  so at first almost all the ma gnetom otive force is across the air gap, and the result­ ing nux increase is linear. Wh en the iron finally saturates, the reluctance of the iron  284 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Air-gap lioe  , , , , , , , , ,  (a)  (b,  Open-cin:uit characteristic  (OCC)  Short-cin:uit characteristic  (SCC)  nGURES -17  (a) The open-cin:uit characteristic  (OCC) of 3. syn
chronous generator.  (b) The short-cin:uit characteristic  (SCC) of a synchronous generator.  increases dramatically, and the flux increases mu ch more slowly with an increase  in ma gnetomotive force.1lle linear portion of an ace is called the air-gap line of  the characteristic.  1lle second step in the process is to conduct the shon-circuit test. To per­ form the short-circuit test, adjust the field current to zero again and short-circuit  the tenninals of the generator through a set of ammet
ers. Th en the armature cur­ rent lit or the line current IL is mea sured as the field current is increased. Such a  plot is called a short-circuit characteristic (SeC) and is show n in Figure 5- 17b. It  is essentially a straight line. To understand why this characteristic is a straight line,  look at the equivalent circuit in Figure 5- 12 when the terminals of the ma chine  are short-circuited. Such a circuit is show n in Figure 5- \8a. Notice that when the  tenninals are short-circuited, the 
annature current lit is given by  EA  IA = RA + jX s (5-23)  and its ma gnitude is just given by  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 285  (b, (.,  ------------ Bsta! B...,  ("  FIGURE 5-18  (a) Th e equivalent circuit of a synchronous generator during the short-circuit test. (b) Th e resulting  phasor diagram. (c) Th e magnetic fields during the short-circuit test.  r~E~A""" 1 -,  A - VRi + xl (5-24)  The resulting phasor diagram is show n in Figure 5-18b, and the corresponding  ma gnetic fields are show 
n in Figure 5-18c. Since Bsalmost cancels B R , the net  ma gnetic field B Det is very small (corresponding to internal resistive and inductive  drops only). Since the net ma gnetic field in the ma chine is so small, the ma chine  is unsaturated and the sec is linear.  To understand what infonnation these two characteristics yield, notice that,  with Vo/> equal to zero in Figure 5-18, the internnl mnchine impedance is given by  EA Zs = V RA 2 + X2 = - (5-25) , IA  Since Xs» RIl, this equation re
duces to  (5-26)  If Ell and III are know n for a given situation, then the synchronous reactance Xs  can be found.  Therefore, an approximate method for detennining the synchronous reac­ tance Xs at a given field current is  I. Get the internal generated voltage Ell from the ace at that field current.  2. Get the short-circuit current now l,o.,sc at that field current from the Sec.  3. Find Xs by applying Equation (5-26).  286 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Air-gap line ___ - - -ace  sec  x, 
 o o  ""GURE 5-19  A sketch of the approximate synchronous reacl3.nce of a synchronous generator as a function of the  field current in the machine. The constant value of reactance found at low values of field current is  the uns(J/umted synchronous reactance of the machine.  TIlere is a problem with this approach, howeve r. The internal generated  voltage Ell come s from the acc, where the ma chine is partially saturated for  large field currents, while III is taken from the sec, where the ma c
hine is unsatu­ rated at all field currents. TIlerefore, at higher field currents, the Ell taken from the  aec at a given field current is not the sam e as the Ell at the srune field current un­ der short-circuit conditions, and this difference make s the resulting value of Xs  only approximate.  H owever, the answer given by this approach is accurate up to the point of  saturation, so the unsaturated synchronous reactance Xs.~ of the ma chine can be  found simply by applying Equation (5-26) at 
any field current in the linear por­ tion (on the air-gap line) of the acc curve.  TIle approximate value of synchronous reactance varies with the degree of  saturation of the ace, so the val ue of the synchronous reactance to be used in a  given problem should be one calculated at the approximate load on the ma chine.  A plot of approximate synchronous reactance as a function of field current is  show n in Figure 5- 19.  To get a m ore accurate estimation of the saturated synchronous reactance,
  refer to Section 5-3 of Reference 2.  If it is important to know a winding's resistance as well as its synchronous  reactance, the resistance can be approximated by applying a dc voltage to the  windings while the ma chine is stationary and mea suring the resulting current  flow . TIle use of dc voltage m eans that the reactance of the windings will be zero  during the mea surement process.  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 287  This technique is not perfectly accurate, since the ac resistance will be
  slightly larger than the dc resistance (as a result of the skin effect at higher fre­ quencies). Th e m easured value of the resistance can even be plugged into Equa­ tion (5-26) to improve the estimate of X s, if desired. (Such an improvement is not  mu ch help in the approximate approach- saturation causes a mu ch larger error in  the X s calculation than ignoring Rio. does.)  The Short-Circuit Ratio  Another parameter used to describe synchronous generators is the short-circuit ra­ tio. 1ll
e short-circuit ratio of a generator is defined as the ratio of the field current  requiredfor the rated voltage at open circuit to the field current required for the  rated armature current at short circuit. It can be show n that this quantity is just  the reciprocal of the per-unit value of the approximate saturated synchronous re­ actance calculated by Equation (5-26).  Although the short-circuit ratio adds no new information about the genera­ tor that is not already know n from the saturated
 synchronous reactance, it is im­ portant to know what it is, since the tenn is occasionally encountered in industry.  Example 5-1. A 2oo-kVA, 480-y' 50-H z, V-connected synchronous generator  with a rated field current of 5 A was tested, and the following data were taken:  1. VT,OC at the rated h was measured to be 540 V.  2. h,se at the rated If was found to be 300 A.  3. When a dc voltage of 10 V was applied to two of the tenninals, a current of 25 A  was measured.  Find the values of the arm
ature resistance and the approximate synchronous reactance in  ohms that would be used in the generator model at the rated conditions.  Solutioll  The generator described above is V-connected, so the direct current in the resistance test  flows through two windings. Therefore, the resistance is given by  V  2R -= 10. - loe  Voe 10 V  Rio. = 2/0e = (2)(25 A) = 0.2 n  The internal generated voltage at the rated field current is equal to  V,  EIo. = V</I.oc = v"J  =5~V =3 ll.8V  The short-circuit c
urrent 110. is just equal to the line current, since the generator is Y­ cOIUlected:  Ilt,se = 14se = 300 A  288 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I, R, I,  +  0.2!1  R,  jl.02 !1  +  V, E A =312L&Q V ,  L,  ""GURE 5-10  The per-phase equivalent ci["(;uit of the generator in Ex ample 5-1.  Therefore, the synchronous reactance at the rated field current can be calculated from  Equation (5-25):  )(0.20)2 + Xi = 3jrio8AV  )(0.2 0)2 + Xs = 1.039 0  0.04 + xi = 1.08  Xi = 1.04  Xs= 1.020  (5-25)  H 
ow much effect did the inclusion of R" have on the estimate of Xs? Not much. If Xs  is evaluated by Equation (5-26), the result is  X - E" _ 311.8V - 1.040 s - fA - 300 A - Since the error in Xs due to ignoring R" is much less than the error due to saturation effects,  approximate calculations are normally done with Equation (5-26).  The resulting per-phase equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 5-20.  5.S THE SYN C HRONO US GENERATOR  OPER A TIN G A LONE  Th e behavior of a synchronous generator
 under load varies greatly depending on  the power factor of the load and on whether the generator is operating alone or in  parallel with other synchronous generators. In this section, we will study the be­ havior of synchronous generators operating alone. We will study the behavior of  synchronous generators ope rating in parallel in Section 5.9.  TIuougho ut this section, concepts wi ll be illustrated with simp lified phasor  diagrams ignoring the effect of RA- In some of the num erical examp
 les the resis­ tance RA wi ll be included.  Un less otherwise stated in this section, the speed of the generators will be  assumed constant, and all terminal characteristics are drawn assuming constant  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 289  Lo,'  FIGURE 5-21  A single generator supplying a load.  speed. Also, the rotor nux in the generators is assumed constant unless their field  current is explicitly changed.  The Effect of Load Changes on a Synchronous  Generator Operating Alone  To understand the op
erating characteristics of a synchronous generator operating  alone, examine a generator supplying a load. A diagram of a single generator sup­ plying a load is shown in Figure 5-21. What happens when we increase the load  on this generator?  An increase in the load is an increase in the real and/or reactive power  drawn from the generator. Such a load increase increases the load current drawn  from the generator. Because the field resistor has not been changed, the field cur­ rent is constant, 
and therefore the flux cp is constant. Since the prime m over also  keeps a constant speed w, the magnitude of the internal generated voltage Ell =  Kcpw is constant.  If Ell is constant, just what does vary with a changing load? The way to find  out is to construct phasor diagrams showing an increase in the load, keeping the  constraints on the generator in mind.  First, examine a generator operati ng at a lagging power factor. If more load  is added at the same power factor, then 11111 increas
es but remains at the sam e an­ gie () with respect to V 0/> as before. Th erefore, the annature reaction voltage jXsIIl  is larger than before but at the sam e angle. Now since  Ell = Vo/> + jXsIIl  j Xs III mu st stretch between Vo/> at an angle of 0° and Ell, which is constrained to be  of the same ma gnitude as before the load increase. If these constraints are plotted  on a phasor diagram, there is one and only one point at which the annature reac­ tion voltage can be parallel to its origin
al position while increasing in size. Th e re­ sulting plot is show n in Figure 5-22a.  If the constraints are observed, then it is seen that as the load increases, the  voltage V 0/> decreases rather sharply.  N ow suppose the generator is loaded with unity-power-factor loads. What  happens if new loads are added at the same power factor? With the same con­ straints as before, it can be seen that this time Vo/> decreases only slightly (see Fig­ ure 5-22b).  290 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS
  E 'A  E,  jXs lA  jXS IA  , " 0 V ' // V , . ~ .  I, I',  ~  ~  ~  ~  , ~  , ~ , ~ , ~ , ~  ',,/'y~  v , , ,  (a) "  ,  ~  ~  ~  ~  E 'A ,  ~  ~  I',  ~  ~  I,  " , ,,'  ""GU R E 5-11  "  111. I'll.  jXSIA  E,  V . V ;  'h'  jXs IA  V ' V  • •  The elIect of an increase in generator loads at constant power factor upon its terminal voltage.  (a) Lagging power factor; (b) unity power factor; (c) teading power factor.  Finally, let the generator be loaded with leading-powe r-factor loads. If new 
 loads are added at the sam e power factor this time, the annature reaction voltage  lies outside its previous value, and Vo/> actually rises (see Figure 5-22c). In this last  case, an increase in the load in the generator produced an increase in the tenninal  voltage. Such a result is not something one would expect on the basis of intuition  alone.  General conclusions from this discussion of synchronous generator behav­ ior are  I. If lagging loads (+ Q or inductive reactive power loads) are a
dded to a gen­ erator, Vo/> and the terminal voltage Vrd ecrease significantly.  2. If unity-power-factor loads (no reactive power) are added to a generator, there  is a slight decrease in V 0/> and the tenninal voltage.  3. If leading loads (--Q or capacitive reactive power loads) are added to a gener­ ator, V 0/> and the tenninal voltage will rise.  A convenient way to compare the voltage behavior of two generators is by  their voltage regulation. T he voltage regu lation (VR) of a generator i
s defined by  the equation  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 291  V n1 - Va I VR = Va x 100% (4-67)  where V ol is the no-load voltage of the generator and Vfl is the full-load voltage of  the generator. A synchronous generator operating at a lagging power factor has a  fairly large positive voltage regulation, a synchronous generator operating at a  unity power factor has a small positive voltage regu lation, and a synchronous gen­ erator operating at a leading power factor often has a negative voltage
 regulation.  Normally, it is desirable to keep the voltage supplied to a load constant, even  though the load itself varies. H ow can tenninal voltage variations be corrected for?  The obvious approach is to vary the magnitude ofE), to compen sate for changes in  the load. Recall that E), = Kcpw. Since the frequency should not be changed in a  nonnal system, E), mu st be controlled by varying the flux in the ma chine.  For example, suppose that a lagging load is added to a generator. Then the  
terminal voltage will fall, as was previously show n. To restore it to its previous  level, decrease the field resistor RF" If RF decreases, the field current wil I increase.  An increase in IF increases the flux, which in turn increases E)" and an increase in  E), increases the phase and terminal voltage. nlis idea can be summarized as  follows:  I. De creasing the field resistance in the generator increases its field current.  2. An increase in the field current increases the flux in the ma ch
ine.  3. An increase in the flux increases the internal generated voltage E), = Kcpw.  4. An increase in E), increases Vo/> and the terminal voltage of the generator.  Th e process can be reversed to decrease the tenninal voltage. It is possible  to regulate the tenninal voltage of a generator throughout a series of load changes  simply by adjusting the field current.  Exa mpl e Problem s  Th e follow ing three problems illustrate simple calculations involving voltages,  currents, and power flow
s in synchronous generators. Th e first problem is an ex­ ample that includes the armature resistance in its calculations, while the next two  ignore R),. Part of the first example problem addresses the question: H ow must a  generator s field current be adjusted to keep VT constant as the load changes? On  the other hand, part of the second example problem asks the question: lfthe load  changes and the field is left alone, what happens to the terminnl voltage? Y ou  should compare the calculate
d behavior of the generators in these two problems  to see if it agrees with the qualitative arguments of this section. Finally, the third  example illustrates the use of a MATLAB program to derive the terminal charac­ teristics of synchronous generator.  Exa mpl e 5-2. A 480-V, 6()"H z, ~-co lUlected, four-pole SynChroflOUS geflerator has  the OCC shown in Figure 5--23a. This geflerator has a synchronous reactaflce of 0.1 n afld  292 ELECTR IC M AC HINE R Y RJNDA ME N TALS  >  • ~  • " ~  .. . 
§  § ., ,  •• y  0  ~  600  500  400  300  200  100  II o  0.0  V  /  I  /  /  1.0 2.0 3.0  I,t '" 692.8 L - 36.87° A  ""GU R E 5-23  /  /'  /  /  4.0 5.0 6.0  F ield current. A  v •  ,.,  ,b,  7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0  (a) Open-drwit characteristic of the generator in Ex amp le 5-2. (b) Phasor diagram of the generator  in E xample 5-2.  an ann ature resistance of 0.0 15 n. At fullload, the machine supplies 1200 A at 0.8 PF lag­ ging. Under full-load conditions. the friction and windage losses are 40 kW
 . and the core  losses are 30 kW. Ignore any field circuit losses.  S YN C HR O N O U S GENE RA TOR S 293  (a) Wh at is the speed of rotation of this generator?  (b) H ow mu ch field current mu st be supplied to the generator to m ake the terminal  voltage 480 V at no load?  (c) If the generator is now cOlUlected to a load and the load draws 1200 A at 0.8 PF  lagging, how mu ch field current w ill be required to keep the terminal voltage  equal to 480 V ?  (d) H ow mu ch powe r is the generator
 now supplying? H ow mu ch powe r is supplied  to the generator by the prime m over? Wh at is this m achine's overall efficiency?  (e) If the generator's load were suddenly disconnected from the line, w hat wo uld  happen to its terminal voltage?  (jJ Finally, suppose that the generator is cOIUlected to a load draw ing 1200 A at 0.8  PF leading. H ow mu ch field current w ould be required to keep Vrat 480 V ?  Solutioll  This synchronous generator is .d.-connected, so its phase voltage is equal 
to its line voltage  V. = Vr, w hile its phase current is related to its line current by the equation I L = ~/ •.  (a) Th e relationship between the electrical frequency produced by a synchronous  generator and the m echanical rate of shaft rotation is given by Equation (4--34):  Th erefore,  ".p  fe = 120  12!X60 Hz ) _  4 poles 1800 r/min  (4--34)  (b) In this m achine, Vr = V •. Since the generator is at no load, IA = 0 and EA = V •.  Th erefore, Vr = V. = EA = 480 V, and from the open-circui
t characteristic,  I" = 4.5 A.  (c) If the generator is supplying 1200 A. then the armature current in the m achine is  1..1 = 1 2~A = 692.8 A  Th e phasor diagram for this generator is show n in Figure 5-23b. If the terminal  voltage is adjusted to be 480 V, the size of the internal generated voltage EA is  given by  EA = V. + RAIA + jXsI,\  = 480 LO° V + (0.0 15 n X 692.8 L -36.87° A ) + (j0.1 0)(692.8 L -36.87° A )  = 480 LO° V + 10.39 L -36.87° V + 69.28 L53 .13° V  = 529.9 + j49.2 V = 532 L
5.JO V  To keep the tenninal voltage at 480 V, E,\ mu st be adjusted to 532 V. From Fig­ ure 5-23, the required field current is 5.7 A.  (d) Th e powe r that the generator is now supplying can be found from Equ ation  (5-16):  (5--16)  294 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  = VJ(480 VXI200 A) cos 36.87°  = 798 kW  To detennine the power input to the generator, use the power-flow diagram (Fig­ ure 5-15). From the power-flow diagram, the mechanical input power is given by  The stray losses were not 
specified here, so they will be ignored. In this genera­ tor, the electrical losses are  P olo< 10 .. = 311RA  = 3(692.8 A)2(0.015 f.!) = 21.6 kW  The core losses are 30 kW, and the friction and windage losses are 40 kW, so the  total input power to the generator is  P in = 798kW + 21.6kW + 30kW + 40kW = 889.6kW  Therefore, the machine's overall efficiency is  Pout 798 kW  7f = p x 100% = 8896 kW x 100% = 89.75%  rn .  (e) If the generator's load were suddenly disconnected from the line, the cur
rent IA  would drop to zero, making EA = V •. Since the field current has not changed, lEAl  has not changed and V. and Vr must rise to equal EA' Therefore, if the load were  suddenly dropped, the terminal voltage of the generator would rise to 532 V.  (f) If the generator were loaded down with 1200 A at 0.8 PF leading while the ter­ minal voltage wa s 480 V, then the internal generated voltage would have to be  EA = V. + RA IA + jXsI,\  = 480LO ° V + (0.015 n)(692.8L36.87° A) + (j0.1 nX692.8L36
.87 ° A)  = 480 LO ° V + 10.39 L36.87° V + 69.28 L 126.87° V  = 446.7 + j61.7 V = 451 L7.1 0 V  Therefore, the internal generated voltage EA must be adjusted to provide 451 V if Vr  is to remain 480 V. Using the open-circuit characteristic, the field current would  have to be adjusted to 4.1 A.  Which type of load (leading or lag ging) needed a larger field current to  maintain the rated voltage? Which type of load (leading or lagging) placed m ore  thermal stress on the generator? Why ?  Exampl
e 5-3. A 480-V, 50-H z, Y -connected, six-pole synchronous genera­ tor has a per-phase synchronous reactance of 1.0 n. Its full-load armature current is  60 A at 0.8 PF lagging. This generator has friction and windage losses of 1.5 kW and  core losses of 1.0 kW at 60 H z at full load. Since the armature resistance is being ig­ nored, assrune that the j2R losses are negligible. The field current has been adjusted  so that the terminal voltage is 480 V at no load.  (a) What is the speed of rotatio
n of this generator?  (b) What is the terminal voltage of this generator if the following are true?  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 295  I. It is loaded with the rated current at 0.8 PF lagging.  2, It is loaded with the rated current at 1.0 PF.  3, It is loaded with the rated current at 0.8 PF leading.  (c) What is the efficiency of this generator (ignoring the lUlknown electrical losses)  when it is operating at the rated current and 0.8 PF lagging?  (d) H ow much shaft torque must be applied by the
 prime mover at full load? H ow  large is the induced cOlUltertorque?  (e) What is the voltage regulation of this generator at 0.8 PF lagging? At 1.0 PF? At  0.8 PF leading?  Solution  This generator is V-connected, so its phase voltage is given by V. = Vr /v'J. That mean s  that when Vr is adjusted to 480 V, V. = 277 V. The field current has been adjusted so that  Vr ... = 480 V, so V. = 277 V. At no load, the armature current is zero, so the armature re­ action voltage and the I},R}, drops are
 zero. Since I}, = 0, the internal generated voltage  E}, = V. = 277 V. The internal generated voltage E},(= Kq,w) varies only when the field  current changes. Since the problem states that the field current is adjusted initially and then  left alone, the magnitude of the internal generated voltage is E}, = 277 V and will not  change in this example.  (a) The speed of rotation of a synchronous generator in revolutions per minute is  given by Equation (4-34):  Therefore,  1201. " = -­m p  _ limP 
 Ie - 120  = 120(50 H z) _ 1000 rlmin  6 poles  Alternatively, the speed expressed in radians per second is  Wm = (1000r/ min)e6~~n)e~~ad)  = 104.7 radls  (4-34)  (b) I. If the generator is loaded down with rated current at 0.8 PF lagging, the re­ sulting phasor diagram looks like the one shown in Figure 5-24a. In this  phasor diagram, we know that V. is at an angle of 0°, that the magnitude of  E}, is 277 V, and that the quantity jXsI}, is  jXsI}, = j(1.0 nX60 L - 36.87° A) = 60 L5 3.13° V  The
 two quantities not known on the voltage diagram are the magnitude of  V. and the angle 0 of E},. To find these values, the easiest approach is to con­ struct a right triangle on the phasor diagram, as shown in the figure. From  Figure 5-24a, the right triangle gives  E1 = (V. + Xsl}, sin 9)2 + (Xsl}, cos 9)2  Therefore, the phase voltage at the rated load and 0.8 PF lagging is  296 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  60 L 53.13°  v,  ,b,  v,  " ,  ""G UR E 5-14  Generator phasor diagrams fo
r Example 5-3. (a) Lagging power factor; (b) unity pow er factor;  (c) leading power factor.  (277 vi = [V. + (1.0 0)(60 A ) sin 36.87°]2 + [(1.0 n X60 A ) cos 36.87°]2  76,729 = (V. + 36)1 + 2304  74,425 = (V. + 36)2  272 .8 = V,., + 36  V,., = 236.8 V  Since the generator is Y-colUlected, Vr = V3 V . = 410 V.  2. If the generator is loaded w ith the rated current at unity power factor, then  the phasor diagram w i11look like Figure 5-24h . To find V. here the right tri­ angle is  SYNC H RONOUS
 GENERATORS 297  £1 = vi + (XsIA)2  (277V)2 = vi+ [(1.00)(60A)]2  76,729 = Vi + 3600  Vi = 73,129  V. = 270.4 V  Therefore, Vr = V3"V. = 46S.4 V.  3. When the generator is loaded with the rated current at O.S PF leading, the re­ suiting phasor diagram is the one shown in Figure 5-24c. To find V. in this  situation, we construct the triangle OAB shown in the figure. The resulting  equation is  £1 = (V. - XsIA)2 + (XsI./t cos (/)2  Therefore, the phase voltage at the rated load and O.S PF leading 
is  (277 V )2 = [V. - (l.OnX60A) sin 36.S7°f + [(1.0 0)(60 A) cos 36.S7o]2  76,729 = (V. - 36)2 + 2304  74,425 = (V. - 36)2  272.S = V. - 36  V. = 30S.S V  Since the generator is Y-cOIUlected, Vr = V3"V. = 535 V.  (c) The output power of this generator at 60 A and O.S PF lagging is  POU,=3 V.IAcos ()  = 3(236.S VX60AXO.S) = 34.1 kW  The mechanical input power is given by  = 34.1 kW + a + 1.0kW + 1.5kW = 36.6kW  The efficiency of the generator is thus  Pout 34.1 kW  7f = P, x 100% = 366 kW x 100%
 = 93.2%  rn .  (d) The input torque to this generator is given by the equation  T = Pin =  - W.  36.6 kW  125.7 radls = 291.2 N · m  The induced cOlUltertorque is given by  P.:oov = Tind = Wv  34.1 kW  125.7 radls = 271.3 N · m  (e) The voltage regulation of a generator is defined as  298 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  v - " V R = nl () X 100%  V, (4--67)  B y this defmition, the voltage regulation for the lagging, lUlity, and leading  powe r-factor cases are  1. Lagging case: V R = 48
0 ~I~ ~1O V x 100% = 17.1%  2. Unity case: V R = 480 ~6; ~68 V x 100% = 2.6%  3. Leading case: V R = 480 ~3; ~35 V x 100% = -10.3%  In E xam ple 5-3, lagg ing loads resulted in a drop in termin al vo ltage, unity­ powe r-factor loads caused little effect on VT , and leading loads resulted in an in­ crease in tenninal vo ltage.  Exampl e 5-4. A ssum e that the generator of Example 5-3 is operating at no load  w ith a tenninal voltage of 480 V. Plot the tenninal characteristic (terminal voltage ve
rsus  line current) of this generator as its arm ature ClUTent varies from no-load to full load at a  powe r factor of (a) 0.8 lagging and (b) 0.8 leading. Assum e that the field current rem ains  constant at all times.  Solutioll  Th e terminal characteristic of a generator is a plot of its tenninal voltage versus line cur­ rent. Since this generator is Y-cOIlllected. its phase voltage is given by V. = VT IV'3. If Vr  is adjusted to 480 V at no-load conditions. then V. = fA = 277 V. B ecause th
e field ClUTent  rem ains constant, fA w ill remain 277 V at all times. Th e output current h from this gener­ ator w ill be the sam e as its armature current IA because it is V-connected.  (a) If the generator is loaded w ith a 0.8 PF lagging clUTent. the resulting phasor di­ agram looks like the one shown in Figure 5-24a. In this phasor diagram . we  know that V. is at an angle of 0°. that the m agnitude of EA is 277 V. and that the  quantity jXSIA stretches betwee n V. and EA as show n. Th e 
two quantities not  known on the phasor diagram are the m agnitude of V . and the angle 0 of EA. To  find V .. the easiest approach is to construct a right triangle on the phasor dia­ gram . as show n in the figure. From Figure 5--24a. the right triangle gives  ~ = (V. + X SIA sin (J)2 + (XSIA cos (J)2  This equation can be used to solve for V., as a flUlction of the current IA :  V. = JE1 (XiA cos 0)2 - XiA sin 0  A simple MATLAB M -filecan be used to calculate V.(and hence VT) as a func­ tion 
of current. Such an M -file is show n below :  ~ M-file : t e rm _cha r_a .m  ~ M-file to p lo t the te rmina l cha racte ris tics o f the  ~ gene ra to r o f E xam p le 5 -4 w ith a n 0.8 PF lagg ing load .  ~ First , initia lize the c urrent a m p litudes (21 va lues  ~ in the ra nge 0-60 A)  i_a = (0,1:20) .. 3;  SY N C HR O N OUS G ENE RATORS 299  % N ow initia lize a ll o ther va lues  v-ph ase = zeros(1 ,21 );  e_a = 277.0;  x_s = 1.0;  theta = 36 .S7 .. (p i /1 SO ); % Co nverted to radia
ns  % N ow calc ulate v-ph ase fo r each c urrent leve l  f o r ii = 1:2 1  e o d  (x_s .. i_a(ii) .. cos(the ta))"2 )  (x_s .. i_a(ii) .. s in(the ta));  % Ca lc ulate terminal vo ltage from the phase vo ltage  v_t = v-ph ase .. sqrt(3) ;  % Plo t the terminal ch aracteri stic, remembering the  % the line c urre nt i s the same as i_a  p lo t (i_a, v_t , 'Co l o r' , 'k' , 'Linew idth' ,2.0) ;  x labe l ('Line CU rre nt (A ) ', 'Fontwe i ght' , 'Bo ld ') ;  y labe l ( 'Te rmin a l Vo ltage (V) 
', 'Fontwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  title ('Te rmin a l C h a racteri stic fo r O.S PF lagg ing load ', ...  'Fo ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  grid o n ;  ax is([O 60 400 550 ] );  The plot resulting when this M -file is executed is shown in Figure 5-25a.  (b) If the generator is loaded with a 0.8 PF leading current, the resulting phasor di­ agram looks like the one shown in Figure 5-24c. To fmd V.' the easiest ap­ proach is to construct a right triangle on the phasor diagram, as shown in the fig­ ure. Fr
om Figure 5-24c, the right triangle gives  E1 = (V. - XsfA sin 9)2 + (XsfA cos 9)2  This equation can be used to solve for V", as a ftmction of the current fA:  V. = JEl (XsfA cos (J)l + XsfA sin 9  This equation can be used to calculate and plot the terminal characteristic in a  manner similar to that in part a above. The resulting tenninal characteristic is  shown in Figure 5-25b.  5.9 PARALLEL OPERATION OF  AC GENERATORS  In today's wor ld, an isolated synchrono us generator supplying its ow 
n load inde­ pendently of other generators is very rare. Such a situation is found in only a few  out-of-the-way applications such as em ergency generators. For all usual genera­ tor applications, there is m ore than one generator operating in parallel to supply  the pow er demanded by the loads. An extreme examp le of this situation is the U.S.  power grid, in which literally thousands of generators share the load on the  system.  300 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  550  >  • 500  00  •  r--
--I---- --------I---- -------- ~ .. " .,  ~ 450  400 0 \0 20 30 40 50  Line current. A  ,,'  550 ,----,---,--,---,----,----,  >  ~ 500  • ~ e- o  " § 450 ~  4OO0·'----"IOc---C20~---"30c----4O~---c50'---~60  Line current. A  ,b,  ""GU R E 5-25  (a) Thrminal characteristic for the generator of Ex ample 5-4 when loaded with an 0.8 PF lagging  loo.d. (b) Thrminal characteristic for the generator when loaded with an 0.8 PF leading load.  Why are synchronous generators operated in parallel? Th ere are
 several ma­ jor advantages to such operation:  I. Several generators can supply a bigger load than one ma chine by itself.  2. H aving many generators increases the reliability of the power system, since  the failure of anyone of them does not cause a total power loss to the load.  3. H aving many generators operating in parallel allows one or m ore of them to  be rem oved for shutdown and preventive maintenance.  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 301  '\  Generator I Lood  / s,  . - Generator 2  HGU R 
E 5-26  A generator being paralleled with a running power system.  4. If only one generator is used and it is not operating at near full load, then it  will be relatively inefficient. With several smaller ma chines in parallel, it is  possible to operate only a fraction of them. The ones that do operate are op­ erating near full load and thus m ore efficiently.  This section explores the requirem ents for paralleling ac generators, and  then looks at the behavior of synchronous generators operat
ed in parallel.  T he Co nd itions R equired for Paralleling  Figure 5-26 shows a synchronous generator G t supplying power to a load, with  another generator G l about to be paralleled with G t by closing the sw itch St. What  conditions mu st be met before the sw itch can be closed and the two generators  connected?  If the sw itch is closed arbitrarily at som e m oment, the generators are liable  to be severely damaged, and the load may lose power. I f the voltages are not ex­ actly the sam e
 in each conductor being tied together, there will be a very large cur­ rent flow when the sw itch is closed. T o avoid this problem, each of the three  phases mu st have exactly the same voltage magnitude and phase angle as the con­ ductor to which it is connected. In other words, the voltage in phase a mu st be ex­ actly the same as the voltage in phase a' , and so forth for phases b-b' and c-c'. To  achieve this match, the follow ing paralleling conditions mu st be met:  I. 1lle rm s line vol
tages of the two generators mu st be equal.  2. 1lle two generators mu st have the same phase sequence.  3. 1lle phase angles of the two a phases mu st be equal.  4. 1lle frequency of the new generator, called the oncom ing generator, mu st be  slightly higher than the frequency of the running system.  Th ese paralleling conditions require som e explanation. Condition I is obvi­ o",- in order for two sets of voltages to be identical, they mu st of course have the  sam e rm s ma gnitude of voltag
e. The voltage in phases a and a' will be completely  302 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  • v, • v,  v,  abc phase sequence acb phase sequence  ,,'  Generator I Lo""  Generator 2  Switch S[  ,b,  ""GURE 5-27  (a) The two possible phase sequences of a three-phase system. (b) The three-light-bulb method for  checking phase sequence.  identical at all times if both their ma gnitudes and their angles are the sam e, which  explains condition 3.  Condition 2 ensures that the sequence in which the
 phase voltages peak in  the two generators is the same. Ifthe phase sequence is different (as shown in Fig­ ure 5-27a), then even though one pair of voltages (the a phases) are in phase, the  other two pairs of voltages are 120 0  out of phase. If the generators w ere connected  in this mann er, there w ould be no problem with phase a, but huge currents w ould  flow in phases band c, dama ging both ma chines. To correct a phase sequence  problem, simply swap the connections on any two of the th
ree phases on one of  the ma chines.  If the frequencies of the generators are not very nearly equal when they are  connected together, large power transients will occur until the generators stabilize  at a comm on frequency. The frequencies of the two ma chines mu st be very nearly  equal, but they cannot be exactly equal. 1lley mu st differ by a small amo unt so  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 303  that the phase angles of the oncoming ma chine will change slow ly with respect to  the phase angles o
f the running system. In that way, the angles between the volt­ ages can be observed and sw itch SI can be closed when the system s are exactly in  phase.  Th e Ge neral Procedure for Paralleling Ge nerators  Suppose that generator G l is to be connected to the running system shown in Fig­ ure 5-27. TIle follow ing steps should be taken to accomplish the paralleling.  First, using voltmeters, the field current of the oncoming generator should be  adjusted until its tenninal voltage is equal to t
he line voltage of the running system.  Second, the phase sequence of the oncoming generator mu st be compared to  the phase sequence of the running system. TIle phase sequence can be checked in  a number of different ways. One way is to alternately connect a small induction  motor to the terminals of each of the tw o generators. I f the motor rotates in the  sam e direction each time, then the phase sequence is the sam e for both generators.  If the m otor rotates in opposite directions, then t
he phase sequences differ, and  two of the conductors on the incoming generator mu st be reversed.  Another way to check the phase sequence is the three-light-bulb method. In  this approach, three light bulbs are stretched across the open terminals of the  sw itch connecting the generator to the system as show n in Figure 5-27b. As the  phase changes between the two system s, the light bulbs first get bright (large  phase difference) and then get dim (small phase difference). If all three bulbs 
get  bright and dark together, then the systems have the same phase sequence. If the  bulbs brighten in succession, then the systems have the opposite phase sequence,  and one of the sequences mu st be reversed.  N ext, the frequency of the oncomin g generator is adjusted to be slightly  higher than the frequency of the running system. TIlis is done first by watching a  frequency meter until the frequencies are close and then by observing changes in  phase between the system s. TIle oncoming gen
erator is adjusted to a slightly  higher frequency so that when it is connected, it will com e on the line supplying  power as a generator, instead of consumin g it as a m otor would (this point will be  explained later).  Once the frequencies are very nearly equal, the voltages in the two system s  will change phase with respect to each other very slowly. TIle phase changes are  observed, and when the phase angles are equal, the sw itch connecting the two sys­ tems together is shut.  H ow can o
ne tell when the two system s are finally in phase? A simple way  is to watch the three light bulbs described above in connection with the discussion  of phase sequence. When the three light bulbs all go out, the voltage difference  across them is zero and the systems are in phase. This simple scheme works, but  it is not very accurate. A better approach is to employ a synchroscope. A synchro­ scope is a meter that m easures the difference in phase angle between the a phases  of the two system s
. The face of a synchroscope is show n in Figure 5-28. TIle dial  shows the phase difference between the two a phases, with 0 (meaning in phase)  304 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  \\..._SC,_"_,h,;,'C'"C""_ J  FIGURE 5-28  A synchrosrope.  at the top and 180 0  at the bottom. Since the frequencies of the two system s are  slightly different, the phase angle on the m eter changes slowly. If the oncoming  generator or system is faster than the running system (the desired situation), then  the ph
ase angle advances and the synchroscope needle rotates clockwise. If the  oncoming ma chine is slow er, the needle rotates counterclockwise. Wh en the syn­ chroscope needle is in the vertical position, the voltages are in phase, and the  switch can be shut to connect the system s.  Notice, though, that a synchroscope checks the relationships on only one  phase. It gives no infonnation about phase sequence.  In large generators belonging to power systems, this whole process of par­ alleling a new
 generator to the line is automated, and a computer does this job. For  smaller generators, though, the operator manually goes through the paralleling  steps just described.  Frequency-Power and Voltage-Reactive Power  Characteristics of a Synchronolls Generator  A ll generators are driven by a prime mover , which is the generator's source of  m echanical power. TIle m ost comm on type of prime m over is a steam turbine, but  other types include diesel engines, gas turbines, water turbines, and 
even wind  turbines.  R egardless of the original power source, all prime m overs tend to behave in  a similar fashion--.:1.s the power drawn from them increases, the speed at which  they turn decreases. Th e decrease in speed is in general nonlinear, but som e form  of governor m echanism is usually included to make the decrease in speed linear  with an increase in pow er demand.  What ever governor me chanism is present on a prime m over, it will always  be adjusted to provide a slight droopin
g characteristic with increasing load. Th e  speed droop (SD ) ofa prime mov er is defined by the equation  I SO = nnl nn nil x 100% I (5-27)  whe re n o] is the no-load prime-m over speed and no is the full-load prime-m over  speed. M ost generator prime m overs have a speed droop of 2 to 4 percent, as de­ fined in Equation (5-27). In addition, most governors have som e type of set point  .5 ,  I  "  J  o  ",  o  ,b,  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 305  Power.  kW  Power.  kW  HGURE 5-29  (a) The spe
ed-versus-power curve  for a typical prime mover. (b) The  resulting frequency-versus-power  curve for the generator.  adjustment to allow the no-load speed of the turbine to be varied. A typical speed­ versus-power plot is show n in Figure 5-29.  Since the shaft speed is related to the resulting electrical frequency by Equa­ tion (4-34),  (4-34)  the power output of a synchronous generator is related to its frequency. An exam­ ple plot of frequency versus power is show n in Figure 5-29b. Freque
ncy-power  characteristics of this sort play an essential role in the parallel operation ofsyn­ chronous generators.  Th e relationship between frequency and power can be described quantita­ tively by the equation  where P = power output of the generator  Jot = no-load frequency of the generator  !.y. = operating frequency of system  sp = slope of curve, in kW /H z or MW /H z  (5-28)  A similar relationship can be derived for the reactive power Q and terminal  voltage VT. As previously seen, whe
n a lagging load is added to a synchronous  306 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  V To ]  Q, 0  kYAR consumed  ""GURE 5-30  Qn Q (reactive power).  kYAR supplied  The curve of terminal voltage (Vr) versus reactive power (Q) for a synchronous generator.  generator, its tenninal voltage drops. Likew ise, when a leading load is added to a  synchronous generator, its tenninal voltage increases. It is possible to make a plot  oftenninal voltage versus reactive power. and such a plot has a drooping cha
rac­ teristic like the one show n in Figure 5-30. This characteristic is not intrinsically  linear, but many generator voltage regulators include a feature to make it so. The  characteristic curve can be moved up and down by changing the no-load tenninal  voltage set point on the voltage regulator. As with the frequency-powe r character­ istic, this curve plays an important role in the parallel operation of synchronous  generators.  TIle relationship between the terminal voltage and reactive pow
er can be  expressed by an equation similar to the frequency-power relationship [Equation  (5-28)] if the voltage regulator produces an output that is linear with changes in  reacti ve power.  It is important to realize that when a single generator is operating alone, the  real power P and reactive power Q supplied by the generator will be the amount  demanded by the load attached to the generator- the P and Q supplied cannot be  controlled by the generator's controls. Therefore, for any given r
eal power, the  governor set points control the generator's operating frequency Ie and for any given  reactive power, the field current controls the generator's tenninal voltage VT .  Example 5-5. Figure 5-31 shows a generator supplying a load. A second load is to  be connected in parallel with the first one. The generator has a no-load frequency of 61.0  Hz and a slope sp of I MWlHz. Load I consume s a real power of I()(x) kW at 0.8 PF lag­ ging. while load 2 consrunes a real power of 800 kW at
 0.707 PF lagging.  (a) Before the sw itch is closed. what is the operating frequency of the system?  (b) After load 2 is cOIUlected. what is the operating frequency of the system?  (c) After load 2 is cOIUlected. what action could an operator take to restore the sys­ tem frequency to 60 Hz?  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 307  y "- Lo'" 1  /'  Turbine generator  I I Lo'" 2  FIGURE 5-31  The power system in Example 5-5.  Solutioll  This problem states that the slope of the generator's characteristic i
s I MW/Hz and that its  no-load frequency is 61 H z. Therefore, the power produced by the generator is given by  P = sl--JnJ - J.y.)  p  f.y• = Jol - sp  (a) The initial system frequency is given by  = 61 H z - lOOOkW I M W/Hz = 61 H z - I Hz = 60 H z  (b) After load 2 is connected,  = 61 H z - 1800 kW I MW/Hz = 61 H z - 1.8 H z = 59.2 H z  (5--28)  (c) After the load is connected, the system frequency falls to 59.2 H z. To restore the  system to its proper operating frequency, the operator shou
ld increase the gov­ ernor no-load set points by 0.8 H z, to 61.8 H z. This action will restore the sys­ tem frequency to 60 H z.  T o summarize , wh en a generator is operating by itself supplying the system  loads, then  I. 1lle real and reactive power supplied by the generator will be the amount de­ manded by the attached load.  2. 1lle governor sct points of the generator will control the operating frequency  of the power system.  308 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  /,  -p o  Consumed  ,,' 
 ""GURE 5-32  p.  kW  supplied  v,  - Q o  Consumed  Q.  kVAR  supplied  ,b,  Curves for an infinite bus: (a) frequency versus power and (b) tenninal voltage versus reactive power.  3. The field current (or the field regulator set points) control the terminal volt­ age of the power system.  nlis is the situation found in isolated generators in remote field environments.  Operation of Generators in Parallel with Large  Power Systems  Wh en a synchronous generator is connected to a power system, t
he power system  is often so large that nothing the operator of the generator does will have mu ch of  an effect on the power system. An exampl e of this situation is the connection of a  single generator to the U.S. power grid. 1lle U.S. power grid is so large that no  reasonable action on the part of the one generator can cause an observable change  in overall grid frequency.  nlis idea is idealized in the concept of an infinite bus. An infinite bus is a  pow er system so large that its voltag
e and frequency do not vary regardless of  how mu ch real and reactive power is drawn from or supplied to it. The power­ frequency characteristic of such a system is shown in Figure 5-32a, and the reac­ tive power-voltage characteristic is shown in Figure 5-32b.  To understand the behavior of a generator connected to such a large system,  examine a system consisting of a generator and an infinite bus in parallel supply­ ing a load. Assume that the generator's prime mov er has a governor mechanis
m ,  but that the field is controlled manually by a resistor. lt is easier to explain gener­ ator operation without considering an automatic field current regulator, so this dis­ cussion will ignore the slight differences caused by the field regulator when one  is present. S uch a system is shown in Figure 5-33a.  Wh en a generator is connected in parallel with another generator or a large  system, the frequency and terminnl voltage of all the mnchines must be the same,  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS
 309  Infinite bus  ;- Generator )::::::::::::::::::::~U  ,,'  f.  P jmoo,' kW PiJJ. bw Pc·kW  ,b,  FIGU R E 5-33  (a) A synchronous generator operating in parallet with an infinite bus. (b) The frequency-versus­ power diagram (or lwuse diagmm ) for a synchronous generator in parallel with an infinite bus.  since their o utput conductors are tied together. T herefore, their real power ­ frequency and reactive power- voltage characteristics can be plotted back to back,  with a comm on vertical ax
is. S uch a sketch, sometime s infonnally called a house  diagram, is show n in Figure 5-33b .  A ssume that the generator has just been paralleled with the infinite bus ac­ cording to the procedure described previously. T hen the generator will be essen­ tially "floating" on the line, supplying a small amount of real power and little or  no reactive power. nlis situation is shown in Figure 5-34.  Suppose the generator had been paralleled to the line but, instead of being at  a slightly higher f
requency than the running system , it was at a slightly lowe r fre­ quency. In this case, when paralleling is completed, the resulting situation is show n  in Figure 5-35. Notice that here the no-load frequency of the generator is less than  the system 's operating frequency. At this frequency, the power supplied by the gen­ erator is actually negative. I n other words, when the generator's no-load frequency  is less than the system 's operating frequency, the generator actually consume s elec­ 
tric power and runs as a m otor. It is to ensure that a generator come s on line sup­ plying power instead of consumin g it that the oncoming ma chine's frequency is ad­ justed higher than the running system 's frequency. Many real generators have a  310 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  !.. H z  P. k:W P. k:W  ""GURE 5-34  The frequency-versus-power diagram at the moment just after paralleling.  !.. H z  P. k:W Pc<O P. k:W  (consuming)  ""GURE 5-35  The frequency-versus-power diagram if the no-l
oad frequency of the generator were slightly less  than system frequency before paralleling.  reverse-power trip connected to them, so it is imperative that they be paralleled  with their frequency higher than that of the running system. If such a generator  ever starts to consume power. it will be automatically disconnectedfrom the line.  Once the generator has been connected, what happens when its governor set  points are increased? Th e effect of this increase is to shift the no-load frequenc
y  of the generator upward. Since the frequency of the system is unchanged (the fre­ quency of an infmite bus cannot change), the power supplied by the generator in­ creases. lllis is shown by the house diagram in Figure 5-36a and by the phasor di­ agram in Figure 5-36b . Notice in the phasor diagram that E). sin /) (which is  proportional to the power supplied as long as VT is constant) has increased, while  the ma gnitude of E). (= K$w ) remains constant, since both the field current IF and  t
he speed of rotation w are unchanged. As the governor set points are further in­ creased, the no-load frequency increases and the power supplied by the generator  increases. As the power output increases, E). remains at constant ma gnitude while  E). sin /) is further increased.  Piofbw  P_ '" constant'" PB+P G  , I,  FIGURE 5-36  , 1 ' ,  ,,'  ,b,  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 311  P. k:W  E,  -E~----- t"P~  ---}O<P G1 -- --- --- v,  Th e effect of increasing the governor's set points on (a) the ho
use diagram; (b) the phasor diagram  What happens in this system if the power output of the generator is in­ creased until it exceeds the power consumed by the load? If this occurs, the extra  power generated flows back into the infinite bus. The infmite bus, by definition,  can supply or consum e any amount of power without a change in frequency, so  the extra power is consumed.  After the real power of the generator has been adjusted to the desired value,  the phasor diagram of the generator l
oo ks like Figure 5-36b. N otice that at this  time the generator is actually operating at a slightly leading power factor, supply­ ing negative reactive power. Alternatively, the generator can be said to be con­ sumin g reactive power. H ow can the generator be adjusted so that it will supply  some reactive power Q to the system? This can be done by adjusting the field cur­ rent of the ma chine. To understand why this is true, it is necessary to consider the  constraints on the generator's oper
ation under these circum stances.  Th e first constraint on the generator is that the power must remain constant  when IF is changed. Th e power into a generator is given by the equation Pin =  'TiDdWm , N ow, the prime m over of a synchronous generator has a fixed torque-speed  312 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ~  , ,  , ,  , ~~ , ,  , I,  ~Q r-Q~_-_--i~_"  ""GURE 5-37  I,  ,  ,  I,  The effect of increasing the generator's field current on the phasor diagram of the machine.  characteristi
c for any given governor setting. This curve changes only when the  governor set points are changed. Since the generator is tied to an infinite bus, its  speed cannot change. If the generator's speed does not change and the governor  set points have not been changed, the power supplied by the generator mu st re­ main constant.  If the power supplied is constant as the field current is changed, then the  distances proportional to the power in the phasor diagram (110. cos () and EIo. sin 8)  canno
t change. When the field current is increased, the nux <P increases, and  therefore EIo. (= K<piw) increases. If EIo. increases, but EIo. sin 8 mu st remain con­ stant, then the phasor EIo. mu st "slide" along the line of constant power, as shown  in Figure 5-37. Since Vo/> is constant, the angle of jXsllo. changes as show n, and  therefore the angle and ma gnitude of 110. change. Notice that as a result the distance  proportional to Q (110. sin ()) increases. In other words, increasing the fiel
d current  in a synchronous generator operating in parallel with an infinite bus increases the  reactive power output of the generator.  To summarize, when a generator is operating in parallel with an infinite bus:  I. The frequency and tenninal voltage of the generator are controlled by the sys­ tem to which it is connected.  2. Th e governor set points of the generator control the real power supplied by  the generator to the system.  3, The field current in the generator controls the reactive 
power supplied by the  generator to the system.  lllis situation is mu ch the way real generators operate when connected to a very  large power system.  O peration of Ge nerators in Parallel w ith O ther  Ge nerators of the Sam e Size  When a single generator operated alone, the real and reactive powers (P and Q )  supplied by the generator were fixed, constrained to be equal to the power de­ manded by the load, and the frequency and tenninal voltage were varied by the  SY N C HR O N OUS G ENE R
ATORS 313  governor set points and the field current. When a generator operated in parallel  with an infinite bus, the frequency and tenninal voltage were constrained to be  constant by the infmite bus, and the real and reactive powers were varied by the  governor set points and the field current. What happens when a synchronous gen­ erator is connected in parallel not with an infinite bus, but rather with another gen­ erator of the same size? What will be the effect of changing governor set poi
nts  and field currents?  If a generator is connected in parallel with another one of the same size, the  resulting system is as shown in Figure 5-38a. In this system, the basic constraint  is that the sum of the real and reactive powers supplied by the two generators  must equal the P and Q deman ded by the load. Th e system frequency is not con­ strained to be constant, and neither is the power of a given generator constrained  to be constant. Th e power-frequency diagram for such a system imm
 ediately after  G l has been paralleled to the line is shown in Figure 5-38b. H ere, the total power  P,,,, (which is equal to PJood) is given by  (5-29a)  and the total reactive power is given by  (5-29b)  What happens if the governor set points of G l are increased? When the gov­ ernor set points of G 2 are increased, the power-frequency curve of G 2 shifts up­ ward, as show n in Figure 5-38c. Remember, the total power supplied to the load  mu st not change. At the original frequency fj, the 
power supplied by G J and G l  will now be larger than the load demand, so the system cannot continue to oper­ ate at the same frequency as before. In fact, there is only one frequency at w hich  the sum of the powers out of the two generators is equal to PJood' Th at frequency fl  is higher than the original system operating frequency. At that frequency, G l sup­ plies more power than before, and G J supplies less power than before.  Th erefore, when two generators are operating together, an in
crease in gov­ ernor set points on one of them  I. Increases the system frequency.  2. Increases the power supplied by that generator. while reducing the power  supplied by the other one.  What happens if the field current of G 2 is increased? TIle resulting behavior  is analogous to the real-power situation and is show n in Figure 5-38d. When two  generators are operating together and the field current of G l is increased,  I. The system terminal voltage is increased.  2. The reactive power Q s
upplied by that generator is increased, while the re­ active power supplied by the other generator is decreased.  kW  kVAR  314  t,  601h  P~  ,b,  Generator I t,  h ------- ----j--------"'~  : II  pc.  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  pis)  p,.  P~  P~  ,,'  Generator I V,  -------r------, V" , , , , , ,  Qe. QGI {b  Q,.  Q.  ,d,  P" ~  Vn  Qm  P~  Generntor 2  kW  Generator 2  kVA R  HGURE 5-38  (a) A generator COIloected in parallel with another  m achine of the sam e size. (b) Th e corresponding house  dia
gram at the moment generator 2 is paralleled with the  system. (e) The effect of increasing generator 2's  governor set points on the operation of the system.  (d) Th e effect of increasing generator 2's field current  on the operation of the system.  Generator I  Slope = I MW /H z  kW P t =1.5 MW  61.5 H z  60 H ,  /= 60 H z  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 315  Generator 2  P 2= 1.0MW kW  FIGURE 5-39  The llOuse dia.gram for the system in Example 5-:5.  If the slopes and no-load frequencies of the ge
nerator's speed droop  (frequency-power) curves are know n, then the powers supplied by each generator  and the resulting system frequency can be determined quantitatively. E xample  5--6 shows how this can be done.  EXllmple 5-6. Figure 5-38a shows two generators supplying a load. Generator I  has a no-load frequency of 61.5 Hz and a slope SpI of I MW /H z. Generator 2 has a no-load  frequency of 61.0 Hz and a slope sn of I MWlHz. Th e two generators are supplying a real  load totaling 2.5 MW a
t 0.8 PF lagging. Th e resulting system powe r-frequency or house  diagram is show n in Figure 5-39.  (a) At what frequency is this system operating, and how mu ch power is supplied by  each of the two generators?  (b) Suppo se an additional I-MW load were attached to this power system. What  would the new system frequency be, and how mu ch power would G I and G 2  supply now ?  (c) With the system in the configuration described in part b, what will the system  frequency and generator powers be 
if the governor set points on G 2 are in­ creased by 0.5 Hz ?  Solutioll  Th e power produced by a synchronous generator with a given slope and no-load frequency  is given by Equation (5-28):  P I = SPI(foJ.l - l>y.)  P2 = sn(foJ2 - l>y.)  Since the total powe r supplied by the generators mu st equal the power consum ed by the  loads,  P loo.d = P I + P2  These equations can be used to answer all the questions asked.  316 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (a) In the first case, both generators h
ave a slope of I MW /H z, and G I has a no-load  frequency of 61 .5 H z, w hile G 2 has a no-load frequency of 61.0 H z. Th e total  load is 2.5 MW. Th erefore, the system frequency can be found as follows :  P load = P I + P l  = Spt(fol.1 - I.Y') + sn(fol.l - I.Y')  2.5 MW = (1 MW /Hz )(61.5 Hz - I.Y') + (1 MW/Hz X 61 Hz - f.y.)  = 6 1.5 MW - (I MW/Hz )l.y• + 6 1 MW - (1 MW/H z)f.ys  = 122.5 MW - (2 MW /H z)f.y•  therefore (" = 122.5 MW - 2.5 MW = 60 0 H Jsy. (2MW/H z) . z  Th e resulting powe
 rs supplied by the two generators are  P I = spl(fnJ.1 - f.y.)  = (1 MW/H zX 61.5 H z - 60.0 H z) = 1.5 MW  P2 = sn(fnJ.2 - f.y.)  = (1 MW/H zX 61.0 H z - 60.0 H z) = I MW  (b) Wh en the load is increased by I MW , the total load becom es 3.5 MW. Th e new  system frequency is now given by  Pload = Spt(fol.1 - I.Y') + sn(fol.l - f.y.)  3.5 MW = (1 MW /Hz )(61.5 Hz - I.y.) + (1 MW/Hz X 61 Hz - f.ys)  = 6 1.5 MW - (I MW/Hz )l.y• + 6 1 MW - (1 MW/H z)f.y.  = 122.5 MW - (2 MW /H z)f.y•  therefore ("
 = 122.5 MW - 3.5MW = 595 H Jsy. (2MW/H z) . z  Th e resulting powe rs are  P I = spl(fnJ.1 - f.y.)  = (1 MW/H zX 61.5 H z - 59.5 H z) = 2.0 MW  P2 = sn(fnJ.2 - f.y.)  = (1 MW/H zX 61.0 H z - 59.5 H z) = 1.5MW  (c) If the no-load governor set points of G l are increased by 0.5 H z, the new system  frequency becom es  P load = Spt(fol.1 - I.y.) + sn(fol.l - I.Y')  3.5 MW = (1 MW /H z)(61.5 Hz - f.y.) + (1 MW /Hz X 61.5 Hz - f.y.)  = 123 MW - (2 MW /Hz )f.y•  123 MW - 3 .5 MW  f.y • = (2MW/H z) = 
59.75 H z  Th e resulting powe rs are  P I = P l = Spt(fol.l - I.y.)  = (1 MW/Hz X 61.5 Hz - 59.75 H z) = 1.75 MW  SYNCHRONOUS GENERATORS 317  Notice that the system frequency rose, the power supplied by G 2 rose, and the power  supplied by G 1 fell.  Wh en two generators of similar size are operating in parallel, a change in  the governor set points of one of them changes both the system frequency and the  power sharing between them. It would nonnally be desired to adjust only one of  these qua
ntities at a time. H ow can the power sharing of the power system be ad­ justed independently of the system frequency, and vice versa?  Th e answer is very simple. An increase in governor set points on one gen­ erator increases that ma chine's power and increases system frequency. A decrease  in governor set points on the other generator decreases that ma chine's power and  decreases the system frequency. Th erefore, to adjust power sharing without  changing the system frequency, increase the go
vernor set points of one generator  and simultaneously decrease the governor set points of the other generator (see  Figure 5-40a). Similarly, to adjust the system frequency without changing the  power sharing, simultaneously increase or decrease both governor set points (see  Figure 5-40b).  Reactive power and tenninal voltage adjustments work in an analogous  fashion. To shift the reactive power sharing without changing Vn simultaneously  increase the field current on one generator and decreas
e the field current on the  other (see Figure 5-40c). To change the tenninal voltage without affecting the re­ active power sharing, simultaneously increase or decrease both field currents (see  Figure 5-4(kl).  To summarize, in the case of two generators operating together:  I. TIle system is constrained in that the total power supplied by the two genera­ tors together mu st equal the amount consum ed by the load. Neither/.y• nor VT  is constrained to be constant.  2. To adjust the real power s
haring between generators without changing/.y"  simultaneously increase the governor set points on one generator while de­ creasing the governor set points on the other. TIle ma chine whose governor  set point was increased will assume m ore of the load.  3. To adjust /.Y' without changing the real power sharing, simultaneously in­ crease or decrease both generators' governor set points.  4. To adjust the reactive power sharing between generators without changing  VT , simultaneously increase th
e field current on one generator while decreas­ ing the field current on the other. Th e ma chine whose field current was in­ creased will assume more of the reactive load.  5. To adjust VTwithout changing the reactive power sharing, simultaneously in­ crease or decrease both generators' field currents.  It is very important that any synchronous generator intended to operate in par­ allel with other ma chines have a drooping frequency-powe r characteristic. If two  generators have flat or nearly
 flat characteristics, then the power sharing between  Genemtor I  ,- kW P, P" ,  kW P,  Generator I  - kVAR Q, Q,  Generator I  kVA R Q,  H GU R E 5-40  /. '"  Generator 2  ------ \ ,  I=constant l , ,  , ,  , ,  , ,  ,  -'  P, P ' , ,,'  I. H z  ,b,  v,  Generator 2  ,  VT = con5lantI ,  ,,'  v,  ,d,  ,  ,  ,  ,- Generator 2  Qi  kW  kW  kVA R  kVAR  (a) Shifting power sharing without affecting system frequency. (b) Shifting system frequency  without affecting power sharing. (c) Shifting react
ive power sharing without affecting temJinal  voltage. (d) Shifting terminal voltage without affecting reactive power sharing.  318  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 3 19  t,  p, ------------~==========;---------------- p,  FIGURE 5-41  Two synchronous generators with flat frequency-power characteristics. A very tiny change in the no­ load frequency of either of these machines could cause huge shifts in the power sharing.  Ihem can vary widely with only the tiniest changes in no-load speed. 1llis proble
m  is illustraled by Figure 5-41. Notice that even very tiny changes in InJ in one of the  generators w ould cause wild shifts in power sharing. To ensure good control of  power sharing between generators, they should have speed droops in the range  of 2 to 5 percent.  5.10 SY N C HR O N OUS  GE N E R ATO R T R A N SIE N TS  Wh en the shaft torque applied to a generator or the output load on a generator  changes suddenly, there is always a transient lasting for a finite period of time be­ fore t
he generator returns to steady state. For example, when a synchronous gen­ erator is paralleled with a running power system , it is initially turning faster and  has a higher frequency than the power system does. Once it is paralleled, there is  a transient period before the generator steadies down on the line and runs at line  frequency while supplying a small amount of power to the load.  To illustrate this situation, refer to Figure 5-42. Figure 5-42a show s the  ma gnetic fields and the phas
or diagram of the generator at the mom ent just before  it is paralleled with the power system. Here, the oncomin g generator is supplying  no load, its stator current is zero, E ... = V q., and RR = Ro ...  At exactly time t = 0, the sw itch connecting the generator to the power sys­ tem is shut, causing a stator current to flow . Since the generator's rotor is still  turning faster than the system speed, it continues to m ove out ahead of the sys­ tem 's voltage Vo/>. The induced torque on the
 shaft of the generator is given by  (4-60)  The direction of this torque is opposite to the direction of motion, and it increases as  the phase angle between DR and D ... ,Cor E ... and Vo/» increases.nlis torque opposite  w  320 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ",  ~jXSI A  Ill. \~  ,b,  ""GURE 5-42  w  Bs Tind '" k BR x" .. ,  Tind is clockwise  D,  (a) The phasor diagram and magnetic fields of a generator at the momem of paralleling with 3. large  power system. (b) The phasor diagram and hou
se diagram shortly after a. H ere. the rotor has moved  on ahead of the net nt3.gnetic fields. producing a clockwise torque. This torque is slowing the rotor  down to the synchronous speed of the power system.  the direction of motion slows down the generator until it finally turns at synchronous  speed with the rest of the power system.  Similarly, if the generator were turning at a speed lower than synchronous  speed when it was paralleled with the power system, then the rotor would fall be­ h
ind the net ma gnetic fields, and an induced torque in the direction of motion  would be induced on the shaft of the machine. This torque would speed up the  rotor until it again began turning at synchronous speed.  Transient Stability of Synchronolls Generators  W e learned earlier that the static stability limit of a synchronous generator is the  maximum power that the generator can supply under any circumstances. Th e  maximum power that the generator can supply is given by Equation (5-21):  
_ 3'"4,EA  Pmax - X ,  and the corresponding maximum torque is  _ 3'"4,EA  T=- X W ,  (5-21)  (5-30)  In theory, a generator should be able to supply up to this amount of power and  torque before becoming unstable. In practice, howeve r, the maximum load that  can be supplied by the generator is limited to a mu ch lowe r level by its dynamic  stability limit.  To understand the reason for this limitation, consider the generator in Figure  5-42 again. If the torque applied by the prime mover (Tap
p) is suddenly increased,  the shaft of the generator will begin to speed up, and the torque angle [) will increase  as described. As the angle [) increases, the induced torque Tind of the generator will  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 32 1  120  11Xl -- --- -- -- -- ---- -- -- ,  E 80  -0  fin>'aDtaooow  '-• , (j(]  !  • , 40  .l  "  f\  / [\ V " V  ~  20  0.5 LO  Time ,s  FIGURE 5-43  Th e dynamic response when an applied torque equal to 50% of Tmu is suddenly added to a  synchronous generator.  inc
rease until an angle [) is reached at which T;Dd is equal and opposite to T opp' TIlis is  the steady-state operating point of the generator with the new load. H oweve r, the ro­ tor of the generator has a great deal of inertia, so its torque angle /) actually over­ shoots the steady-state position, and gradually settles out in a damped oscillation, as  show n in Figure 5-43. TIle exact shape of this damped oscillation can be detennined  by solving a nonlinear differential equation, which is bey
ond the scope of this book.  For m ore information, see R eference 4, p. 345.  Th e important point about Figure 5-43 is that ifat any point in the transient  response the instantaneous torque exceeds T"""" the synchronous generator will be  unstable. Th e size of the oscillations depends on how suddenly the additional  torque is applied to the synchronous generator. If it is added very gradually, the  ma chine should be able to almost reach the static stability limit. On the other  hand, if the
 load is added sharply, the ma chine will be stable only up to a mu ch  lowe r limit, which is very complicated to calculate. For very abrupt changes in  torque or load, the dynamic stability limit ma y be less than halfofthe static sta­ bility limit.  Short-C ircuit Transients  in Synchronous Ge nerators  B y far the severest transient condition that can occur in a synchronous generator  is the situation where the three terminals of the generator are suddenly shorted  out. Such a short on a pow
er system is called afaull. Th ere are several comp o­ nents of current present in a shorted synchronous generator, which will be de­ scribed below. TIle sam e effects occur in less severe transients like load changes,  but they are mu ch more obvious in the extreme case of a short circuit.  322 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  o T ime  Phase a  DC component  -~  o Time  Phase b  - 0  ~  Time  DC component Phase c  ""GURE 5-44  The total fault currents as a function of time during a three-phas
e fault at the terminals of a  synchronous generator.  Wh en a fault occurs on a synchronous generator, the resulting current flow  in the phases of the generator can appear as show n in Figure 5-44. Th e current in  each phase show n in Figure 5-42 can be represented as a dc transient component  added on top of a symm etrical ac component. 1lle symm etrical ac component by  itself is show n in Figure 5-45.  B efore the fault, only ac voltages and currents were present within the gen­ erator, wh
ile after the fault, both ac and dc currents are present. Where did the  dc currents come from? R emember that the synchronous generator is basically  inductive-it is mod eled by an internal generated voltage in series with the syn­ chronous reactance. Also, recall that a current cannot change instantaneously in  an inductor. When the fault occurs, the ac comp onent of current jumps to a very  SubtraDsient  period  Subtransient  period  ,I  T ransient  period  T ransient  p<riod  "n-fit: 1F'f1) 
- •  ,  I Extrapolation of  transient envelope  I  FIGURE 5-45  Extrapolation of  steady value  Th e symmetric ac COntponent of the fault current.  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 323  Steady-state  period  Steady-state  ",nod  l  Actual  envelope  large value, but the total current cannot change at that instant. The dc comp onent  of current is just large enough that the sum of the ac and dc comp onents just after  the fault equals the ac current flowing just before the fault. Since the instanta­ neou
s values of current at the m oment of the fault are different in each phase, the  ma gnitude of the dc comp onent of current wil I be different in each phase.  Th ese dc comp onents of current decay fairly quickly, but they initially av­ erage about 50 or 60 percent of the ac current flow the instant after the fault  occurs. The total initial current is therefore typicalJ y 1.5 or 1.6 times the ac com ­ ponent taken alone.  The ac symm etrical component of current is show n in Figure 5-45. It ca
n be  divided into roughly three periods. During the first cycle or so after the fault oc­ curs, the ac current is very large and falls very rapidly. This period of time is  called the subtransient period. After it is over, the current continues to fall at a  slowe r rate, until at last it reaches a steady state.1lle period of time during which  it falls at a slowe r rate is calJed the transient period, and the time after it reaches  steady state is know n as the steady-state period.  If the rm 
s ma gnitude of the ac compon ent of current is plotted as a function  of time on a semilogarithmic scale, it is possible to observe the three periods of  fault current. Such a plot is show n in Figure 5-46. It is possible to detennine the  time constants of the decays in each period from such a plot.  Th e ac nns current flow ing in the generator during the subtransient period  is called the subtransient current and is denoted by the symbol r. 1llis current is  caused by the damper windings on 
synchronous generators (see Chapter 6 for a  discussion of damper windings). 1lle time constant of the subtransient current is  324 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I.A  (logarithmic  scale)  Subtransient period  , , , , , ,  Transiem period  Steady­ state  period  - - - -""- -~-'----'- I (linear)  ""GU R E 5-46  A semilogarithmic plot of the magnitude of the ac component offault current as a function of time.  The subtransient and transient time constants of the generator can be determined fr
om such a plot.  given the symbol T~, and it can be detennined from the slope of the subtransient  current in the plot in Figure 5-46. This current can often be 10 times the size of  the steady-state fault current.  TIle nns current flowing in the generator during the transient period is  called the transient current and is denoted by the symbolf'. It is caused by a dc  component of current induced in the field circuit at the time of the short. This field  current increases the internal generate
d voltage and causes an increased fault cur­ rent. Since the time constant of the dc field circuit is mu ch longer than the time  constant of the damper windings, the transient period lasts mu ch longer than the  subtransient period. TIlis time constant is given the symbol T'. TIle average nns  current during the transient period is often as mu ch as 5 times the steady-state  fault current.  After the transient period, the fault current reaches a steady-state condition.  TIle steady-state curren
t during a fault is denoted by the symboll". It is given ap­ proximately by the fundamental frequency component of the internal generated  voltage Ell within the ma chine divided by its synchronous reactance:  EA  l .. = X , steady state (5-3 1)  TIle nns ma gnitude of the ac fault current in a synchronous generator varies  continuously as a function of time. If r is the subtransient compon ent of current  at the instant of the fault, l' is the transient comp onent of current at the instant of  
the fault, and I... is the steady-state fault current, then the nn s ma gnitude of the  current at any time after a fault occurs at the tenninals of the generator is  I(t) = (r _ J')e-tlT" + (I' _1,,)e-tlT' + I ... (5-32)  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 325  It is customary to define subtransient and transient reactances for a syn­ chronous ma chine as a convenient way to describe the subtransient and transient  compon ents of fault current. 1lle subtransient reactance of a synchronous gener­ ator is 
defilled as the ratio of the fundam ental comp onent of the internal generated  voltage to the subtransient component of current at the beginning of the fault. It is  given by  X "= ~~ subtransient (5-33)  Similarly, the transient reactance of a synchronous generator is defined as the ra­ tio of the fundamental compon ent of EA to the transient comp onent of current l' at  the beginning of the fault. This value of current is found by extrapolating the sub­ transient region in Figure 5-46 back to
 time zero:  X' = ~~ transient (5-34)  For the purposes of sizing protective equipment, the subtransient current is  often assumed to be E,.,IX", and the transient current is assumed to be EAIX', since  these are the maximum values that the respective currents take on.  N ote that the above discussion of faults assumes that all three phases were  shorted out simultaneously. If the fault does not involve all three phases equally,  then more complex methods of analysis are required to understand i
t.1llese meth­ ods (know n as symm etrical component s) are beyond the scope of this book.  Example 5-7. A lOO-MVA, 13.5-kV, V-connected, three-phase, 60-Hz synchro­ nous generator is operating at the rated voltage and no load when a three-phase fault de­ velops at its tenninals. Its reactances per unit to the machine's own base are  Xs = 1.0 X' = 0.25 X" = 0.12  and its time constants are  T' = 1.1Os T" = O.04s  The initial dc component in this machine averages 50 percent of the initial ac comp
onent.  (a) What is the ac component of current in this generator the instant after the fault  occurs?  (b) What is the total current (ac plus dc) flowing in the generator right after the fault  occurs?  (c) What will the ac component of the ClUTent be after two cycles? After 5 s?  Solutioll  The base current of this generator is given by the equation  (2-95)  100 MVA  = VJ(13.8 kV) = 4184 A  326 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  The subtransient, transient, and steady-state currents, per unit 
and in amperes, are  /" Ell 1.0 8 333 = X,,= 0.12 = .  = (8.333X4184A) = 34,900 A  I' = ~~ = Ol.~ = 4.00  = (4.00)(4184 A) = 16,700 A  Ell 1.0  I" = X' = 1.0 = 1.00  = (1.00)(4184 A) = 4184 A  (a) The initial ac component of current is r = 34,900 A.  (b) The total current (ac plus dc) at the beginning of the fault is  Ita = 1.5r = 52,350 A  (c) The ac component of current as a function of time is given by Equation (5--32):  l(t) = (r _ l')e-llT" + (I' _I,,)~T' + I" (5-32)  = 18,2()()e-4°·04. + 1
2,516r'1.l· + 4184A  At two cycles, t = 1/30 s, the total current is  IUO) = 7910A + 12,142A + 4184A = 24,236 A  After two cycles, the transient component of current is clearly the largest one and  this time is in the transient period of the short circuit. At 5 s, the current is down to  1(5) = 0 A + 133 A + 4184 A = 4317 A  This is part of the steady-state period of the short circuit.  5.11 SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR RATINGS  TIlere are certain basic limits to the speed and power that ma y be obtain
ed from a  synchronous generator. 1l1ese limits are expressed as ratings on the ma chine. The  purpose of the ratings is to protect the generator from damage due to improper op­ eration. T o this end, each ma chine has a number of ratings listed on a nam eplate  attached to it.  Typical ratings on a synchronous ma chine are voltage, frequency, speed, ap­ parent power (kilovoltamperes), power factor. field current, and service factor.  1l1ese ratings, and the interrelationships among them , wi ll
 be discussed in the fol­ low ing sections.  The Voltage, Speed, and Frequency Ratings  Th e rated frequency of a synchronous generator depends on the power system to  which it is connected. Th e comm only used power system frequencies today are  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 327  50 H z (in Eu rope, Asia, etc.), 60 H z (in the Americas), and 400 H z (in special­ purpose and control applications). Once the operating frequency is know n, there  is only one possible rotational speed for a given num ber
 of poles. The fixed rela­ tionship between frequency and speed is given by Equation (4-34):  as previously described.  "m P  k = 120 (4-34)  Perhaps the m ost obvious rating is the voltage at which a generator is de­ signed to operate. A generator's voltage depends on the flux, the speed of rotation,  and the me chanical construction of the m achine. For a given mechanical frame  size and speed, the higher the desired voltage, the higher the ma chine's required  flux. H oweve r, flux cannot be 
increased forever, since there is always a m aximum  allowab le field current.  Another consideration in setting the m aximum allowab le voltage is the  breakdown value of the winding insulation- nonnal operating voltages mu st not  approach breakdown too closely.  Is it possible to operate a generator rated for one frequency at a different fre­ quency? For example, is it possible to operate a 6O- H z generator at 50 H z? 1lle  answer is a qualified yes, as long as certain conditions are m et. B
asically, the  problem is that there is a maximum flux achievable in any given machine, and  since Ell = K<pw , the m aximum allowab le E). changes when the speed is changed.  Specifically, if a 6O- H z generator is to be operated at 50 H z, then the operating  voltage mu st be derated to 50/60, or 83 .3 percent, of its original value. Just the  opposite effect happens when a 50-H z generator is operated at 60 H z.  A pp arent P ow er and Pow er-Factor Ratings  Th ere are two factors that detenn
ine the powe r limits of electric m achines. One is  the me chanical torque on the shaft of the ma chine, and the other is the heating of  the ma chine's windings. In all practical synchronous m otors and generators, the  shaft is strong enough mechanically to handle a mu ch larger steady-state power  than the ma chine is rated for, so the practical steady-state limits are set by heating  in the ma chine's windings.  Th ere are two windings in a synchronous generator, and each one mu st be  prot
ected from overheating. The se two windings are the annature winding and the  field winding. 1lle maximum acceptable annature current sets the apparent power  rating for a generator, since the apparent power S is given by  S=3Vo/>lll (5-35)  If the rated voltage is know n, then the m aximum acceptable armature current de­ tennines the rated kilovoltamperes of the generator:  Srated = 3 '"4..rated I A max  Srated = V3 VL.ratedlL.max  (5-36)  (5-37)  328 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ""GURE 5-4
7  H ow the rotor field current lintit sets the rated power factor of a generator.  It is important to realize that, for heating the annature windings, the power factor  of the armature current is irrelevant. The heating effect of the stator copper losses  is given by  (5-38)  and is independent of the angle of the current with respect to Vo/>. Because the cur­ rent angle is irrelevant to the annature heating, these ma chines are rated in kilo­ voltamperes instead of kilowa tts.  1lle other wi n
ding of concern is the field winding. 1lle field copper losses  are given by  (5-39)  so the ma ximum allowable heating sets a maximum field current for the ma chine.  Since Ell = K4>w this sets the ma ximum acceptable size for Ell.  1lle effect of having a maximum IF and a ma ximum E). translates directly  into a restriction on the lowes t acceptable power factor of the generator when it is  operating at the rated kilovoltamperes. Fig ure 5-47 shows the phasor diagram of  a synchronous generato
r with the rated voltage and armature current. Th e current  can assume man y different angles, as shown. The internal generated voltage Ell is  the sum of V 0/> and jXs Ill. N otice that for som e possible current angles the required  E). exceeds E A,mu . If the generator were operated at the rated annature current and  these power factors, the field winding wou ld burn up.  TIle angle of III that requires the maximum possible Ell while V 0/> remains at  the rated value gives the rated power fa
ctor of the generator. It is possible to op­ erate the generator at a lower (m ore lagging) power factor than the rated value, but  only by cutting back on the kilovoltamperes supplied by the generator.  •  •  FIGU R E 5-48  •  3Vl  X,  v •  (a)  ,b,  0  Volts  kW  " .;" , ,  E,  'B  .'  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 329  A Volts  B  ,  .'  ,  , p 3V.l.ot cosO ,  ,  ,  k:VAR  A  Q=3V.l.otsinO  Derivation of a synchronous generator capability curve. (a) The generator phasor diagram; (b)
 the  corresponding power units.  Sy nchronous Ge nerator Ca pability Curves  Th e stator and rotor heat limits, together with any external limits on a synchro­ nous generator, can be expressed in graphical fonn by a generator capability dia­ gram. A capability diagram is a plot of complex power S = P + jQ. It is derived  from the phasor diagram of the generator, assuming that V o/> is constant at the ma ­ chine's rated voltage.  Figure 5-48a shows the phasor diagram of a synchronous generator o
perat­ ing at a lagg ing power factor and its rated voltage. An orthogo nal set of axes is  drawn on the diagram with its origin at the tip of V 0/> and with units of volts. On  this diagram, vertical segment AB has a length Xs/). cos (), and horizontal segm ent  OA has a length X sI). sin ().  Th e real power output of the generator is given by  P = 3'4,IA cos () (5- 17)  330 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  the reactive power output is given by  Q =3 V4,lA sine  and the apparent power output i
s given by  S=3V 4,lA  (5-19)  (5-35)  so the vertical and horizontal axes of this figure can be recalibrated in terms of  real and reactive power (Figure 5--48b). The conversion factor needed to change  the scale of the axes from volts to voJtamperes (power units) is 3 ~ 1Xs:  ,nd  3 ~  P = 3V4,lA cos e = X (X sIA cos e) (5--40) ,  . 3 V.p .  Q = 3 ~IA S in e = X (X sIA Sin e) , (5-41)  On the voltage axes, the origin of the phasor diagram is at -Vo/,on the hori­ zontal axis, so the origin on t
he power diagram is at  (5-42)  TIle field current is proportional to the ma chine's flux, and the flux is proportional  to Elt = Kcf>w. TIle length corresponding to Elt on the power diagram is  3EA V.p  X, (5-43)  TIle annature current lit is proportional to Xsllt' and the length corresponding to  Xsflt on the power diagram is 3Vq,11l.- 1lle final synchronous generator capability curve is show n in Figure 5-49.  It is a plot of P versus Q , with real power P on the horizontal axis and reactive 
 power Q on the vertical axis. Lines of constant armature current lit appear as lines  of constant S = 3Vq,IIt, which are concentric circles around the origin. Lines of  constant field current correspond to lines of constant E It, which are shown as cir­ cles of ma gnitude 3EIt Vq,IXs centered on the point  3V '  -"-'-' X, (5-42)  TIle armature current limit appears as the circle corresponding to the rated  lit or rated kilovoJtarnperes, and the field current limit appears as a circle corre­ spo
nding to the rated IF or Ell.-Any point that lies w ithin both circles is a safe op­ erating point for the generator.  It is also possible to show other constraints on the diagram, such as the max­ imum prime-mover power and the static stability limit. A capability curve that  also reflects the maximum prime-mover powe r is show n in Figure 5-50.  FIGURE 5-49  Q. k:VAR  3.' •  X,  SY N C H RONOUS G ENE RATORS 331  R otor current  limit  P .k:W  Stator current limit  Th e resulting generator capa
bility curve.  FIGURE 5-50  Q. k:VAR  P .k:W  Prime-mover power limit  Origin of rotor current circle:  3.' Q= - ~'  X,  A capability dia.gram showing the prime-mover power limit.  332 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Example 5-8. A 480-V, 50-Hz , Y -connected, six-pole synchronous generator is  rated at 50 kVA at 0.8 PF lagging. It has a synchronous reactance of 1.0 n per phase. As­ swne that this generator is cOIUlected to a steam turbine capable of supplying up to 45 kW.  The friction and win
dage losses are 1.5 kW, and the core losses are 1.0 kW.  (a) Sketch the capability curve for this generator, including the prime-mover power  limit.  (b) Can this generator supply a line current of 56A at 0.7 PF lagging? Why or why  not?  (c) What is the maximwn amOlUlt of reactive power this generator can produce?  (d) If the generator supplies 30 kW of real power, what is the maximum amount of  reactive power that can be simultaneously supplied?  Solutioll  The maximum current in this generato
r can be fOlUld from Equation (5--36):  s...'ed = 3 VoI!.l1IIod IA .ma x (5-36)  The voltage Vol! of this machine is  VT 4S0 V  Vol! = V3" = ~= 277 V  so the maximum armature ClUTent is  ~ 50kVA  (".max = 3 Vol! = 3(277 V) = 60 A  With this infonnation, it is now possible to answer the questions.  (a) The maximum permissible apparent power is 50 kVA, which specifies the max­ imum safe armature current. The center of the EA circles is at  Q = _ 3V l  X,  = _ 3(277V) 2 = - 230kVAR  1.0 n  The maxi
mum size of EA is given by  EA = Vol! + jXslA  = 277 LO ° V + (i1.0 nX60 L - 36.87° A)  = 313 + j48 V = 317 LS.7 ° V  Therefore, the magnitude of the distance proportional to EA is  3EA VoI!  DE: = X ,  = 3(317 VX277 V) = 263 kVAR  I.on  (5-42)  (5-43)  The maximum output power available with a prime-mover power of 45 kW is  approximately  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 333  Q. k:VAR  Stator currenl "- 50 limit , - -_ _ / Field current limit  -- -25  FIGURE 5-51  " , ,  \  -- 150 75 , P.k:W  -75  - \0
0  - 125  - 150  - 175  -200  ,  M aximum  printe­ mover  power  -225  ~--- Origin of maximum  I =::-rotor current  -250 circle  Th e capability diagram for the generator in Ex ample 5--8.  P DIU_ = P IIIU';' - P mech I.,.. - P axe ..,..  = 45 kW - 1.5 kW - 1.0 kW = 42.5 kW  (This value is approximate because the /2R loss and the stray load loss were not  considered.) The resulting capability diagram is shown in Fig ure 5--51.  (b) A current of 56 A at 0.7 PF lagging produces a real power of  P 
= 3Vo/J,I cos ()  = 3(277 VX56 AXO. 7) = 32.6kW  and a reactive power of  Q = 3V4>/,Isin ()  = 3(277 V)(56AXO.714) = 33.2kVAR  334 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  " < >  " , ,  &  .~  !  "  200  \00  0  - \00  -200 r- -300 r- , -----­-_________ , ________ L ,; ___ -': L_  >-----;---- - :1.0 PF  -----'------------- ----------_.... - .. ~  .. ~  ~~~~~~~~~~~-=~~~~--~~ o 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500  Real power. kW  ""GURE 5-52  Capability curve for a real synchronous generator rated at
 470 kVA. (Courtesy of Ma ratlwn Electric  Company.)  Plotting this point on the capability diagram show s that it is safely within the  maximum (It curve but outside the maximrun I" curve. Therefore, this point is  not a safe operating condition.  (e) When the real power supplied by the generator is zero, the reactive power that  the generator can supply will be maximwn. This point is right at the peak of the  capability curve. The Q that the generator can supply there is  Q = 263 kVAR - 230 kV
AR = 33 kVAR  (d) If the generator is supplying 30 kW of real power, the maximum reactive power  that the generator can supply is 31.5 kVAR. This value can be fOlUld by entering  the capability diagram at 30 kW and going up the constant-kilowatt line lUltii a  limit is reached. The limiting factor in this case is the field clUTe nt- the anna­ ture will be safe up to 39.8 kVAR.  Fig ure 5-52 shows a typical capability for a real synchronous generator.  N ote that the capability boundaries are not
 a perfect circle for a real generator.  nlis is true because real synchronous generators with salient poles have additional  effects that we have not modeled. T hese effects are described in Appendix C.  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 335  Short-Time Operation and Service Factor  Th e mo st important limit in the steady-state operation ofa synchronous generator  is the heating of its armature and field windings. H oweve r, the heating limit usu­ ally occurs at a point mu ch less than the maximum powe
r that the generator is  ma gnetically and me chanically able to supply. In fact, a typical synchronous gen­ erator is often able to supply up to 300 percent of its rated power for a while (un­ til its windings burn up). This ability to supply power above the rated amount is  used to supply m omentary power surges during m otor starting and similar load  transients.  It is also possible to use a generator at powers exceeding the rated values for  longer periods of time, as long as the windings d
o not have time to heat up too mu ch  before the excess load is removed. For example, a generator that could supply  1 MW indefinitely might be able to supply 1.5 MW for a couple of minutes without  serious hann, and for progressively longer periods at lower power levels. H oweve r,  the load mu st finally be removed, or the windings will overheat. Th e higher the  power over the rated value, the shorter the time a ma chine can tolerate it.  Figure 5-53 illustrates this effect. This figure shows
 the time in seconds re­ quired for an overload to cause thennal damage to a typical electrical ma chine,  whose windings were at nonnal operating temperature before the overload oc­ curred.ln this particular ma chine, a 20 percent overload can be tolerated for JOOO  seconds, a 100 percent overload can be tolerated for about 30 seconds, and a 200  percent overload can be tolerated for about 10 seconds before damage occurs.  Th e maximum temp erature rise that a ma chine can stand depends on the 
in­ sulation class of its windings. There are four standard insulation classes: A, B , F,  and H. While there is some variation in acceptable temperature depending on a  ma chine's particular construction and the method of temperature mea surement,  these classes generally correspond to temperature rises of 60, 80, 105, and 125°C,  respectively, above ambient temperature. 1lle higher the insulation class of a  given ma chine, the greater the power that can be drawn out of it without over­ heatin
g its windings.  Overheating of windings is a very serious problem in a m otor or generator.  It was an old rule of thumb that for each 1 DoC temperature rise above the rated  windings temp erature, the average lifetime of a ma chine is cut in half (see Figure  4-20). Mod ern insulating materials are less susceptible to breakdown than that,  but temperature rises still drastically shorten their lives. For this reason, a syn­ chronous ma chine should not be overloaded unless absolutely necessary.
  A question related to the overheating problem is: Just how well is the power  requirement of a ma chine know n? Before installation, there are often only ap­ proximate estimates of load. Because of this, general-purpose ma chines usualJ y  have a sef>!ice factor. The service factor is defined as the ratio of the actual max­ imum power of the ma chine to its nam eplate rating. A generator with a service  factor of 1.15 can actually be operated at 115 percent of the rated load indefinitely  with
out harm. The service factor on a ma chine provides a margin of error in case  the loads were improperly estimated.  336 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  w'  w'  w ,  lei' o  \  ,  1.2  ""GU R E 5-.53  \  '"  ,  1.4  ~  -~  , ,  1.6 1.8 2  Per-unit current  , ,  •  , , ,  2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8  ThemJ al damage curve for a typical synchronous machine. assuming that the windings were already  at operational temperature when the overload is applied. (Courtesy of Maratlwn Electric Company.)  5.12 SU MM 
A R Y  A synchronous generator is a device for converting m echanical power from a  prime m over to ac electric power at a specific voltage and frequency. T he term  synchronous refers to the fact that this ma chine's electrical frequency is locked in  or synchronized with its me chanical rate of shaft rotation. 1lle synchronous gen­ erator is used to produce the vast majority of electric power used throughout the  wor ld.  TIle internal generated voltage of this ma chine depends on the rate of 
shaft  rotation and on the ma gnitude of the field nux. Th e phase voltage of the ma chine  differs from the internal generated voltage by the effects of annature reaction in the  generator and also by the internal resistance and reactance of the annature wind­ ings. T he tenninal voltage of the generator will either equal the phase voltage or be  related to it by V3, depending on whether the ma chine is ,6,-or V- connected.  TIle way in which a synchronous generator operates in a real power sys
tem  depends on the constraints on it. Wh en a generator operates alone, the real and  3  SYNC HR ONOUS GENERATORS 337  reactive powers that mu st be supplied are detennined by the load attached to it,  and the gove rnor set points and field current control the frequency and terminal  voltage, respectively. Wh en the generator is connected to an infinite bus, its fre­ quency and voltage are fixed, so the gove rnor set points and field current control  the real and reactive power flow from the ge
nerator. In real system s containing  generators of approximately equal size, the gove rnor set points affect both fre­ quency and power flow, and the field current affects both tenninal voltage and re­ active power flow .  A synchronous generator's abilit.y to produce electric power is primarily  limited by heating within the ma chine. Wh en the generator's windings overheat,  the life of the ma chine can be severely shortened. Since here are two different  windings (armature and field), there 
are two separate constraints on the generator.  Th e maximum allowable heating in the armature windings sets the maximum  kilovo ltamperes allowable from the ma chine, and the maximum allowable heat­ ing in the field windings sets the maximum size of E),-Th e maximum size of Elt  and the maximum size of lit together set the rated power factor of the generator.  QUESTIONS  5-1. Why is the frequency of a synchronous generator locked into its rate of shaft  rotation?  5-2. Why does an alternator's 
voltage drop sharply when it is loaded down with a lag­ ging load?  5-3. Why does an alternator's voltage rise when it is loaded down with a leading load?  5-4. Sketch the phasor diagrams and magnetic field relationships for a synchronous gen­ erator operating at (a) unity power factor, (b) lagging power factor, (c) leading  power factor.  5-5. Explain just how the synchronous impedance and annature resistance can be deter­ mined in a synchronous generator.  5-6. Why must a 60-H z generator be d
erated if it is to be operated at 50 H z? H ow mu ch  derating must be done?  5-7. Would you expect a 400-H z generator to be larger or smaller than a 6O-H z genera­ tor of the same power and voltage rating? Why ?  5-8. What conditions are necessary for paralleling two synchronous generators?  5-9. Why must the oncoming generator on a power system be paralleled at a higher fre­ quency than that of the nmning system?  5-10. What is an infinite bus? What constraints does it impose on a generator p
aralleled  with it?  5-11. H ow can the real power sharing between two generators be controlled without af­ fecting the system's frequency? H ow can the reactive power sharing between two  generators be controlled without affecting the system's terminal voltage?  5-12. H ow can the system frequency of a large power system be adjusted without affect­ ing the power sharing among the system's generators?  5-13. H ow can the concepts of Section 5.9 be expanded to calculate the system frequency  and 
power sharing among three or more generators operating in parallel?  5-14. Why is overheating such a serious matter for a generator?  >  • 00  •  ~  • 0 .,  ;;  '5 , ., ,  ~  338 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  5-15. Explain in detail the concept behind capability curves.  5-16. Wh at are short-time ratings? Wh y are they important in regular generator operation?  PROBL E M S  5-1. At a location in Europe. it is necessary to supply 300 kW of60-H z powe r. Th e only  powe r sources availab
le operate at 50 H z. It is decided to generate the powe r by  m eans of a m otor-generator set consisting of a synchronous m otor driving a syn­ chronous generator. H ow m any poles should each of the two m achines have in or­ der to convert 50-H z powe r to 60-H z powe r?  5-2. A 23OO- V. lOOO- kVA. O.S-PF -Iagging. 60-H z. two-po le. V-connected synchronous  generator has a synchronous reactance of 1.1 0 and an arm ature resistance of  0.15 o. At 60 H z. its friction and windage losses are 24
 kW . and its core losses are  IS kW. Th e field circuit has adc voltage of200 V. and the m aximum I" is ID A. Th e  resistance of the field circuit is adjustable over the range from 20 to 200 O. Th e  OC C of this generator is show n in Figure P5- 1.  3(XX)  2700  2400  2100  1800  1500  1200  900  600  300  / o  0.0  /  /  1.0  fo'IGUR E "5-1  V  /  2.0  /' /"  V  V  /  3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0  Field current. A  Th e open-circuit characteristic for the generator in Problem 5-2.  7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0  (a) 
H ow mu ch field current is required to m ake Vr equal to 2300 V w hen the gen­ erator is mlUling at no load?  (b) Wh at is the internal generated voltage of this m achine at rated conditions?  S YN C HR O N O U S GENE RA TOR S 339  (c) H ow mu ch field current is required to m ake Vrequal to 2300 V w hen the gen­ erator is rulUling at rated conditions?  (d) H ow mu ch powe r and torque mu st the generator's prime m over be capable of  supplying?  (e) Cons truct a capability curve for this gener
ator.  5-3. A ssum e that the field current of the generator in Problem 5-2 has been adjusted to  a value of 4.5 A.  (a) Wh at will the tenninal voltage of this generator be if it is connected to a  6.-colUlected load w ith an impedance of 20 L 30° O ?  (b) Sketch the phasor diagram of this generator.  (c) Wh at is the efficiency of the generator at these conditions?  (d) N ow asswn e that another identical6.-colUlected load is to be paralleled w ith the  first one. Wh at happens to the phasor d
iagram for the generator?  (e) Wh at is the new tenninal voltage after the load has been added?  (f) Wh at mu st be done to restore the terminal voltage to its original value?  5-4. A ssum e that the field current of the generator in Problem 5-2 is adjusted to achieve  rated voltage (2300 V ) at full-load conditions in each of the questions below .  (a) Wh at is the efficiency of the generator at rated load?  (b) Wh at is the voltage regulation of the generator if it is loaded to rated kilo­ vol
tamperes w ith 0.8-PF -Iagging loads?  (c) Wh at is the voltage regulation of the generator if it is loaded to rated kilo­ voltamperes w ith 0.8-PF -Ieading loads?  (d) Wh at is the voltage regulation of the generator if it is loaded to rated kilo­ voltamperes w ith lUlity power factor loads?  (e) U se MATLAB to plot the terminal voltage of the generator as a flUlction of load  for all three powe r factors.  5-5. A ssum e that the field current of the generator in Problem 5-2 has been adjusted s
o  that it supplies rated voltage w hen loaded w ith rated current at unity powe r factor.  (a) Wh at is the torque angle 0 of the generator w hen supplying rated current at  unity powe r factor?  (b) Wh en this generator is running at full load with lUlity powe r factor, how close  is it to the static stability limit of the m achine?  5-6. A 480-V, 4oo-kVA , 0.85-PF -Iagging, 50-H z, four-pole, 6.-connected generator is  driven by a 500-hp diesel engine and is used as a standby or em ergency ge
nerator.  This m achine can also be paralleled w ith the norm al powe r supply (a very large  powe r system ) if desired.  (a) Wh at are the conditions required for paralleling the em ergency generator w ith  the existing powe r system ? What is the generator's rate of shaft rotation after  paralleling occurs?  (b) If the generator is cOIUlected to the power system and is initially floating on the  line, sketch the resulting ma gnetic fields and phasor diagram.  (c) Th e governor setting on the 
diesel is now increased. Show both by m eans of  house diagram s and by m eans of phasor diagram s what happens to the genera­ tor. H ow mu ch reactive powe r does the generator supply now ?  (d) With the diesel generator now supplying real powe r to the powe r system , what  happens to the generator as its field current is increased and decreased? Show  this behavior both w ith phasor diagram s and w ith house diagram s.  5-7. A 13.8-kV , IO-MV A, 0.8-PF -Iagging, 60-H z, two-po le, Y-CO lUlect
ed steam -turbine  generator has a synchronous reactance of 12 n per phase and an armature resistance  340 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  of 1.5 n per phase. This generator is operating in parallel with a large power system  (infinite bus).  (a) What is the magnitude of EA at rated conditions?  (b) What is the torque angle of the generator at rated conditions?  (c) If the field current is constant, what is the maximwn power possible out of this  generator? H ow much reserve power or torque doe
s this generator have at full  load?  (d) At the absolute maximum power possible, how much reactive power will this  generator be supplying or consruning? Sketch the corresponding phasor dia­ gram. (Assrune h is still unchanged.)  5-8. A 480-V, lOO-kW, two-pole, three-phase, 60-H z synchronous generator's prime  mover has a no-load speed of3630 rfmin and a full-load speed of3570 rfmin.1t is op­ erating in parallel with a 480-V, 75-kW, four-pole, 60-H z synchronous generator  whose prime mover ha
s a no-load speed of 1800 rhnin and a full-load speed of 1785  rfmin. The loads supplied by the two generators consist of 100 kW at 0.85 PF lagging.  (a) Calculate the speed droops of generator I and generator 2.  (b) Find the operating frequency of the power system.  (c) Find the power being supplied by each of the generators in this system.  (d) If Vr is 460 V, what must the generator's operators do to correct for the low ter­ minal voltage?  5-9. TIrree physically identical synchronous genera
tors are operating in parallel. They  are all rated for a full load of 3 MW at 0.8 PF lagging. The no-load frequency of gen­ erator A is 61 H z, and its speed droop is 3.4 percent. The no-load frequency of  generator B is 61.5 Hz , and its speed droop is 3 percent. The no-load frequency  of generator C is 60.5 Hz , and its speed droop is 2.6 percent.  (a) If a total load consisting of 7 MW is being supplied by this power system, what  will the system frequency be and how will the power be shared
 among the three  generators?  (b) Create a plot showing the power supplied by each generator as a function of the  total power supplied to all loads (you may use MATLAB to create this plot). At  what load does one of the generators exceed its ratings? Which generator ex­ ceeds its ratings first?  (c) Is this power sharing in a acceptable? Why or why not?  (d) What actions could an operator take to improve the real power sharing among  these generators?  5-10. A paper mill has installed three st
eam generators (boilers) to provide process steam  and also to use some its waste products as an energy source. Since there is extra ca­ pacity, the mill has installed three 5-MW turbine generators to take advantage of the  situation. Each generator is a 4160-V, 6250-kVA, 0.85-PF-Iagging, two-pole,  Y-cOIlllected synchronous generator with a synchronous reactance of 0.75 n and an  annature resistance of 0.04 n. Generators I and 2 have a characteristic power­ frequency slope sp of 2.5 MWlHz , and
 generators 2 and 3 have a slope of3 MW /Hz.  (a) If the no-load frequency of each of the three generators is adjusted to 61 Hz ,  how much power will the three machines be supplying when actual system fre­ quency is 60 H z?  (b) What is the maximum power the three generators can supply in this condition  without the ratings of one of them being exceeded? At what frequency does this  limit occur? H ow much power does each generator supply at that point?  SYNC H RONOUS GENERATORS 341  (c) What wo
uld have to be done to get all three generators to supply their rated real  and reactive powers at an overall operating frequency of 60 H z?  (d) What would the internal generated voltages of the three generators be under this  condition?  Problems 5- 11 to 5-21 refer to a four-pole, Y-connected synchronous generator rated at  470 kVA, 480 V, 60 H z, and 0.85 PF lagging. Its armature resistance RA is 0.016 n. The  core losses of this generator at rated conditions are 7 kW, and the friction and w
indage  losses are 8 kW. The open-circuit and short-circuit characteristics are shown in Figure  P5-2.  5-11. (a) What is the saturated synchronous reactance of this generator at the rated  conditions?  (b) What is the unsaturated synchronous reactance of this generator?  (c) Plot the saturated synchronous reactance of this generator as a function of load.  5-12. (a) What are the rated current and internal generated voltage of this generator?  (b) What field current does this generator require t
o operate at the rated voltage,  current, and power factor?  5-13. What is the voltage regulation of this generator at the rated current and power  factor?  5-14. If this generator is operating at the rated conditions and the load is suddenly re­ moved, what will the tenninal voltage be?  5-15. What are the electrical losses in this generator at rated conditions?  5-16. If this machine is operating at rated conditions, what input torque must be applied to  the shaft of this generator? Express yo
ur answer both in newton-meters and in  polUld-feet.  5-17. What is the torque angle 0 of this generator at rated conditions?  5-18. A ssume that the generator field current is adjusted to supply 480 V under rated con­ ditions. What is the static stability limit of this generator? (Note: You may ignore RA  to make this calculation easier.) H ow close is the full-load condition of this genera­ tor to the static stability limit?  5-19. A ssume that the generator field current is adjusted to supply
 480 V under rated con­ ditions. Plot the power supplied by the generator as a function of the torque angle o.  (Note: You may ignore RA to make this calculation easier.)  5-20. A ssume that the generator's field current is adjusted so that the generator supplies  rated voltage at the rated load current and power factor. If the field current and the  magnitude of the load current are held constant, how will the terminal voltage  change as the load power factor varies from 0.85 PF lagging to 0.85
 PF leading?  Make a plot of the tenninal voltage versus the impedance angle of the load being  supplied by this generator.  5-21. A ssrune that the generator is connected to a 480-V infinite bus, and that its field cur­ rent has been adjusted so that it is supplying rated power and power factor to the bus.  You may ignore the annature resistance RA when answering the following questions.  (a) What would happen to the real and reactive power supplied by this generator if  the field flux is reduc
ed by 5 percent?  (b) Plot the real power supplied by this generator as a function of the flux cp as the  flux is varied from 75 percent to 100 percent of the flux at rated conditions.  Open Circuit Characteristic  1200  1100  , , , , , , , , , , , , , '- c  >  ~  • • ,  '§ , ., ,  ~  <  • ~  a ,  3  •  ~  lllOO  9lXl  c ,/ C /'  800  700  C /'  I c  6lXl  500  c / c  400 c / /  300  200  V  100 c  °0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9  Field current. A  Shon Circuit Characteristic  16lXl  1400
 C  1200 c  lllOO c  800 c  6lXl c  400 c  200  V  o o  /  0.2  /  /  , ,  0.4 0.6  /  ,  0.8  HGUR E )'5-2  F ield current. A  ,b,  I. I 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5  /'  /  /  , , ,  1.2 1.4  (a) Open-cirwit characteristic curve for the generator in Problems 5- 11 to 5-21. (b) Short-cin:uit  characteristic curve for the generator in Problems 5- 11 to 5-21.  342  S YN C H R O N O U S GENE RA TOR S 343  (c) Plot the reactive pow er supplied by this generator as a function of the flux cp as  the flux is varie
d from 75 percent to 100 percent of the flux at rated conditions.  (d) Plot the line current supplied by this generator as a function of the flux cp as the  flux is varied from 75 percent to lDO percent of the flux at rated conditions.  5-22. A lDO- MVA . 12.S-kV . 0.8S-PF -Iagging. SO- H z. two-po le. Y -cOlUlected synchronous  generator has a per-unit synchronous reactance of 1.1 and a per-lUlit annature resis­ tance of 0.0 12.  (a) Wh at are its synchronous reactance and ann ature resistance 
in oluns?  (b) Wh at is the m agnitude of the internal generated voltage E./t at the rated condi­ tions? Wh at is its torque angle 0 at these conditions?  (c) Ignoring losses in this generator. wh at torque mu st be applied to its shaft by the  prime m over at full load?  5-23. A three-phase Y-cOIUlected synchronous generator is rated 120 MVA . 13.2 kV .  0.8 PF lagging. and 60 Hz. Its synchronous reactance is 0.9 n. and its resistance  m ay be ignored.  (a) Wh at is its voltage regulation?  (b)
 Wh at wo uld the voltage and apparent powe r rating of this generator be if it w ere  operated at 50 H z w ith the sam e annature and field losses as it had at 60 H z?  (c) Wh at would the voltage regulation of the generator be at 50 H z?  5-24. Two identical 600-kVA. 480-V synchronous generators are connected in parallel to  supply a load. Th e prime m overs of the two generators happen to have different  speed droop characteristics. Wh en the field currents of the two generators are equal.  o
ne delivers 4DO A at 0.9 PF lagging, while the other delivers 3DO A at 0.72 PF  lagging.  (a) Wh at are the real power and the reactive powe r supplied by each generator to  the load?  (b) Wh at is the overall pow er factor of the load?  (c) In w hat direction mu st the field current on each generator be adjusted in order  for them to operate at the sam e power factor?  5-25. A generating station for a powe r system consists offour 120-MVA , IS-kV , 0.85-PF­ lagging synchronous generators w ith 
identical speed droop characteristics operating  in parallel. Th e governors on the generators' prime m overs are adjusted to produce  a 3-H z drop from no load to full load. TIrree of these generators are each supplying  a steady 7S MW at a frequency of 60 H z, w hile the fourth generator (called the  swing generator) handles all incremental load changes on the system w hile m ain­ taining the system 's frequency at 60 H z.  (a) At a given instant, the total system loads are 260 MW at a frequen
cy of 60 H z.  Wh at are the no-load frequencies of each of the system 's generators?  (b) If the system load rises to 290 MW and the generator's governor set points do  not change, w hat w ill the new system frequency be?  (c) To what frequency mu st the no-load frequency of the sw ing generator be ad­ justed in order to restore the system frequency to 60 H z?  (d) If the system is operating at the conditions described in part c, w hat wo uld hap­ pen if the sw ing generator we re tripped off t
he line (disconnected from the  powe r line)?  5-26. S uppose that you were an engineer plaMin g a new electric cogeneration facility for  a plant w ith excess process steam. You have a choice of either two IO-MW turbine­ generators or a single 20-MW turbine-generator. What w ould be the advantages and  disadvantages of each choice?  344 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  5-27. A 25-MVA. three-phase. 13.8-kV. two-pole. 60-H z Y-connected synchronous gen­ erator wa s tested by the open-circuit tes
t. and its air-gap voltage was extrapolated  w ith the follow ing results:  Open-circuit test  Field current. A  Line voltage. tV  Extrapolated air-gap voltage. tV  320  13.0  15.4  365  13.8  17.5  380  14.1  18.3  475  15.2  22.8  Th e short-circuit test was then peIfonned with the follow ing results:  Short-circuit test  Field current. A  Affilature current. A  320  \040  Th e armature resistance is 0.24 n per phase.  365  1190  380  1240  475  1550  570  16.0  27.4  570  1885  (a) Find the u
nsaturated synchronous reactance of this generator in oluns per phase  and per unit.  (b) Find the approximate saturated synchronous reactance Xs at a field current of  380 A. Express the answer both in ohm s per phase and per lUlit.  (c) Find the approximate saturated synchronous reactance at a field current of  475 A. Express the answer both in ohm s per phase and in per-unit.  (d) Find the short-circuit ratio for this generator.  5-28. A 20-MVA, 12.2-kY, 0.8-PF-Iagging, Y-connected synchronou
s generator has a neg­ ligible annature resistance and a synchronous reactance of 1.1 per lUlit. Th e gener­ ator is connected in parallel with a 60-H z, 12.2-kV infinite bus that is capable of  supplying or consuming any amOlUlt of real or reactive power with no change in  frequency or tenninal voltage.  (a) What is the synchronous reactance of the generator in oluns?  (b) What is the internal generated voltage EA of this generntor lUlder rated conditions?  (c) What is the annature current IA i
n this m achine at rated conditions?  (d) Suppose that the generator is initially operating at rated conditions. If the inter­ nal generated voltage EA is decreased by 5 percent, what w ill the new annature  current IA be?  (e) Repeat part d for 10, 15,20, and 25 percent reductions in EA.  (j) Plot the ma gnitude of the annature current 1..1 as a function of EA. (You may w ish  to use MATLAB to create this plot.)  SY N C HR O N OUS GENERATORS 345  REFERENCES  1. Chaston. A. N . Electric Machiner
y. Reston. Va.: Re ston Publishing. 1986.  2. Del TOTO. V. Electric M achines and Po· .... er Systelll!i. E nglewood ClilTs. N .J.: Prentice-H all. 1985.  3. Fitzgerald. A. E ., and C. Kingsley. Jr. Electric Ma chinery. N ew Yor\(: M cGraw- H ill. 1952.  4. Fitzgerald. A. E ., C. Kingsley, Jr., and S. D. Um ans. Electric M achinery. 5th ed., N ew York:  M cGraw- H ill. 1990.  5. K osow. Irving L. Electric Ma chinery and Transformers. Englewood ClilTs. N .J.: Prentice-H all.  1972.  6. Liw schitz
-Garik. M ichael. and Clyde Whippl e. AlteflUlting-Current Ma chinery. Princeton. N .J.:  Van N ostrand. 1961.  7. M cPherson. George. An Introduction to Electrical Ma chines and Traruformers. N ew Yor\(: Wiley.  1981.  8. Siemon. G. R., and A. Straughen. Electric M achines. R eading, M ass.: Addison-Wesley. 1980.  9. Werninck. E. H . (ed.). Electric M otor Hatufbook. London: M cGraw- H ill. 1978.  CHAPTER  6  SYNCHRONOUS  MOTORS  S ynchronous m otors are synchronous ma chines used to convert el
ectrical  power to m echanical power. This chapter explores the basic operation of  synchronous m otors and relates their behavior to that of synchronous generators.  6.1 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF  MOTOR OPERATION  To understand the basic concept of a synchronous m otor, look at Figure 6-1, which  show s a two-pole synchronous m otor. 1lle field current IF of the motor produces a  steady-state ma gnetic field HR. A three-phase set of voltages is applied to the stator  orthe ma chine, which produces a 
three-phase current flow in the windings.  As wa s show n in Chapter 4, a three-phase sct of currents in an annature  winding produces a uniform rotating ma gnetic field Bs. Th erefore, there are two  ma gnetic fields present in the ma chine, and the rotor field will tend to line up with  the stator field, just as two bar ma gnets will tend to line up if placed near each  other. Since the stator ma gnetic field is rotating, the rotor ma gnetic field (and the  rotor itself) will constantly try to
 catch up. TIle larger the angle between the two  ma gnetic fields (up to a certain maximum ), the greater the torque on the rotor of  the ma chine. Th e basic principle of synchronous m otor operation is that the rotor  "chases" the rotating stator ma gnetic field around in a circle, never quite catching  up with it.  Since a synchronous m otor is the same physical ma chine as a synchronous  generator, all of the basic speed, power, and torque equations of Chapters 4 and 5  apply to synchronous
 m otors also.  346  SY N C HR O N OUS MOTORS 347  o  /,11,  0, o  Tind",kHRx nS  '" counterclockwise  o  FIGURE 6-1  A two-pole synchronous motor.  The Equivalent Circuit of a Synchronolls Motor  A synchronous m otor is the same in all respects as a synchronous generator, except  that the direction of power flow is reversed. Since the direction of power flow in the  ma chine is reversed, the direction of current flow in the stator of the m otor may be  expected to reverse also. Th erefore, the 
equivalent circuit of a synchronous m otor is  exactly the same as the equivalent circuit of a synchronous generator, except that the  reference direction of IA. is reversed. 1lle resulting full equivalent circuit is shown in  Figure 6-2a, and the per-phase equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 6-2b. As be­ fore, the three phases of the equivalent circuit may be either Y- or d-connected.  Because of the change in direction of lA., the Kirchhoff's voltage law equa­ tion for the equivalent circui
t changes too. Writing a Kirchhoff's voltage law  equation for the new equivalent circuit yields  I V4> - EA + jXSIA + RA IA I  lEA - V4> - jXSIA - RAIA I  (6-1)  (6-2)  This is exactly the srune as the equation for a generator, except that the sign on the  current term has been reversed.  The Synchronolls Motor from a Magnetic  Field Perspective  To begin to understand synchronous m otor operation, take another look at a syn­ chronous generator connected to an infinite bus. Th e generator has a
 prime m over  348 ELECTR IC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I"  jXs R,  )v., E"  I,  R .. I"  R, jXs  ) V.'  R,  V, + E" "-'  L,  I"  - jXs R,  )v"  E"  (a)  I, RJ,{ I,  - - /' jXs R,  V, L, E, V.  ,b,  ""GURE 6-2  (a) The full equivalent circuit of a three-phase synchronous motor. (b) The per-phase equivalent circuit.  turning its shaft, causing it to rotate. The direction of the applied torque T app from  the prime m over is in the direction of motion, because the prime m over make s the  generator r
otate in the first place.  Th e phasor diagram of the generator operating with a large field current is  shown in Figure 6-3a, and the corresponding ma gnetic field diagram is shown in  Figure 6-3b. As described before, RR corresponds to (produces) EA , R net corre­ sponds to (produces) V o/>, and Rs corresponds to E"at (= -jX sIA). TIle rotation of  both the phasor diagram and ma gnetic field diagram is counterclockwise in the  figure, following the standard mathematical convention of increasin
g angle.  TIle induced torque in the generator can be found from the ma gnetic field  diagram. From Equations (4-60) and (4-61) the induced torque is given by  ,  FIGURE 6-3  (a)  • ,  SY N C H RONOUS MOTORS 349  B,  w.~  -rlf, =-------B~  ,b,  (a) P hasor diagram ofa synchronous generator operating at a lagging power factor. (b) Th e  corresponding magnetic field diagram.  ~/~  -- , ,  8  ,  FIGURE 6-4  u,  ,  'V,  ,,~  w.~ "cr,-------'"  ,b, B,  (a) P hasor diagram ofa synchronous motor. (b) T
 he corresponding magnetic field diagram.  (4-60)  (4-61)  N otice that from the ma gnetic field diagram the induced torque in this machine is  clockwise, opposing the direction of rotation. In other words, the induced torque  in the generator is a countertorque, opposing the rotation caused by the external  applied torque "Taw  S uppose that, instead of turning the shaft in the direction of motion, the  prime m over suddenly loses power and starts to drag on the ma chine's shaft. What  happens 
to the ma chine now? Th e rotor slows down because of the drag on its shaft  and falls behind the net ma gnetic field in the ma chine (see Figure 6-4a). As the ro­ tor, and therefore BR , slow s down and falls behind B ne, the operation of the ma chine  suddenly changes. By Equation (4--60), when BR is behind B ... " the induced  350 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  torque's direction reverses and become s counterclockwise. In other w ords, the m a­ chine's torque is now in the direction of mot
ion, and the m achine is acting as a m o­ tor. Th e increasing torque angle 8 results in a larger and larger torque in the direc­ tion of rotation, until eventually the m otor's induced torque equals the load torque  on its shaft. At that point, the m achine will be operating at steady state and syn­ chronous speed again, but now as a m otor.  TIle phasor diagram corresponding to generator operation is shown in Fig­ ure 6-3a, and the phasor diagram corresponding to m otor operation is shown in  
Figure 6-4a. TIle reason that the quantity jXsI), points from Vo/>, to E), in the gen­ erator and from E), to Vo/> in the m otor is that the reference direction of I), w as re­ versed in the definition of the m otor equi valent circuit. Th e basic difference be­ tween motor and generator operation in synchronous m achines can be seen either  in the ma gnetic field diagram or in the phasor diagram. In a generator, E), lies  ahead of Vo/>, and BR lies ahead of 8 0 ... In a motor, E), lies behind V
o/>' and BR lies  behind B oe,. In a m otor the induced torque is in the direction of motion, and in a  generator the induced torque is a countertorque opposing the direction of motion.  6.2 STEADY-STATE SYNCHRONOUS  MOTOR OPERATION  TIlis section explores the behavior of synchronous m otors under varying condi­ tions of load and field current as w ell as the question of pow er-factor correction  with synchronous m otors. Th e following discussions will generally ignore the ar­ m ature resistanc
e of the m otors for simplicity. H ow ever, R), will be considered in  som e of the w orked num erical calculations.  The Synchronous Motor Torque-Speed  Characteristic Curve  Synchronous m otors supply pow er to loads that are basically constant-speed de­ vices. Th ey are usually connected to pow er system s very mu ch larger than the in­ dividual m otors, so the pow er system s appear as infinite buses to the m otors. TIlis  m eans that the terminal voltage and the system frequency will be con
stant regard­ less of the am ount of power drawn by the m otor. 1lle speed of rotation of the m o­ tor is locked to the applied electrical frequency, so the speed of the m otor will be  constant regardless of the load. Th e resulting torque-speed characteristic curve is  shown in Figure 6-5. Th e steady-state speed of the m otor is constant from no load  all the w ay up to the m aximum torque that the m otor can supply (called the pull­ out torque), so the speed regulation of this m otor [Equati
on (4-68)] is 0 percent.  1lle torque equation is  (4-<>1)  (5-22)  SYNC H RONOUS MOTORS 35 1  fpullou1 ----------------- n_. - n, SR= on xlOO%  '"  SR=O%  f",,0<1 ----------------- L-__________________ ~-------- ,.  '.~  FIGU R E 6-S  The torque-speed characteristic of a synchronous motor. Since the speed of the motor is oonstam. its  speed regulation is zero.  Th e maximum or pullout torque occurs when /j = 900. N onnal full-load torques  are mu ch less than that, however. In fact, the pullout
 torque ma y typically be  3 times the full-load torque of the ma chine.  Wh en the torque on the shaft of a synchronous m otor exceeds the pullout  torque, the rotor can no longer remain locked to the stator and net ma gnetic fields.  Instead, the rotor starts to slip behind them. As the rotor slows down, the stator  ma gnetic field "laps" it repeatedly, and the direction of the induced torque in the  rotor reverses with each pass. The resulting huge torque surges, first one way and  then the o
ther way, cause the whole m otor to vibrate severely. Th e loss of syn­ chronization after the pullout torque is exceeded is know n as slipping poles.  Th e ma ximum or pullout torque of the m otor is given by  (6-3)  (6-4)  Th ese equations indicate that the larger the field current (and hence E,...), the  greater the maximum torque of the nwtor. There is therefore a stability advantage  in operating the m otor with a large field current or a large E,.,.  T he Effect of L oad C hanges on a  Sy 
nchronous M otor  If a load is attached to the shaft of a synchronous m otor, the m otor will develop  enough torque to keep the m otor and its load turning at a synchronous speed.  What happens when the load is changed on a synchronous m otor?  352 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (a)  , ,  , ,  IIA2 ilAl  ""GU R E 6-6  , , , , , , ,  IV,  EA4 "j' __ C C ____________ _  (b)  (a) Pltasor diagram of a motor operating at a leading power factor. (b) The effect of an increase in  load on the opera
tion of a synchronous motor.  To find oul, examine a synchronous m otor operating initially with a leading  power factor, as show n in Figure 6--6. If the load on the shaft of the m otor is in­ creased, the rotor will initially slow down. As it does, the torque angle 8 becomes  larger, and the induced torque increases. T he increase in induced torque eventu­ ally speeds the rotor back up, and the motor again turns at synchronous speed but  with a larger torque angle 8.  What does the phasor diag
rrun look like during this process? To find out, ex­ amine the constraints on the ma chine during a load change. Figure 6--6a shows the  motor's phasor diagram before the loads are increased. The internal generated volt­ age EA is equal to K<pw and so depends on only the field current in the ma chine and  the speed of the ma chine. T he speed is constrained to be constant by the input  power supply, and since no one has touched the field circuit, the field current is  constant as well. TIlerefor
e, lEAl must be constant as the load changes. TIle dis­ tances proportional to power (EA sin 8 and JA cos ()) will increase, but the ma gni­ tude of EA mu st remain constant. A s the load increases, EA sw ings down in the  mann er show n in Figure 6-6b. As EA sw ings down further and further, the quantity  SYNC H RONOUS MOTORS 353  jXSIA has to increase to reach from the tip of EA to Vo/> , and therefore the annature  current IA also increases. Notice that the power-factor angle () changes too, 
becom­ ing Jess and less leading and then more and more lagging.  Exa m ple 6-1. A 20S-V, 4S-kVA, O.S-PF-Ieading, a-connected, 60-H z synchro­ nous machine has a synchronous reactance of 2.5 0 and a negligible armature resistance.  Its friction and windage losses are 1.5 kW, and its core losses are 1.0 kW. Initially, the shaft  is supplying a IS-hp load, and the motor's power factor is O.SO leading.  (a) Sketch the phasor diagram of this motor, and find the values of lA, fL' and EA.  (b) A ssume
 that the shaft load is now increased to 30 hp. Sketch the behavior of the  phasor diagram in response to this change.  (c) Find lA, fL' and EA after the load change. What is the new motor power factor?  Solutioll  (a) Initially, the motor's output power is 15 hp. This corresponds to an output of  POOl = (15 hp)(0.746 KWlhp) = 11.19 kW  Therefore, the electric power supplied to the machine is  Pin = Pout + P""",blo<s + P CO/IeJo.. + P el""l.,..  = 11.I9kW+ I.5kW+ 1.0kW+OkW = 13.69kW  Since the m
otor's power factor is O.SO leading, the resulting line current flow is  I - ccciP-"," CC-o L - v'3VTcos 0  13.69 kW  = V3"(20S VXO.SO) = 47.5 A  and the annature current is h/V'!, with O.Sleading power factor, which gives  the result  IA = 27.4 L 36.S7° A  To find EA, apply Kirchhoff's voltage law [Equation (6-2)]:  EA = Vo/> - jXsIA  = 20S L 0° V - (j2.5 0)(27.4 L 36.S7° A)  = 20S L 0° V - 6S.5 L 126.S7° V  =249 .I -jS4.SV =2SSL - 12.4° V  The resulting phasor diagram is shown in Figure 6-7a. 
 (b) A s the power on the shaft is increased to 30 hp, the shaft slows momentarily, and  the internal generated voltage EA swings out to a larger angle /j while maintain­ ing a constant magnitude. The resulting phasor diagram is shown in Figure 6-7b.  (c) After the load changes, the electric input power of the machine becomes  Pin = Pout + Pmoc.b lo<s + PCO/IeJo.. + P el""l.,..  = (30 hpXO.746 kWlhp) + 1.5 kW + 1.0 kW + 0 kW  = 24.SSkW  354 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  , , ,  1..1. '" 27.4
 L 36.87° A  8  ""GU R E 6-7  "J  (b,  , , , , ,  V. '" 208 L r:f' V  jXS IA '" 68.5 L 126.87°  EA "'255L - 12.4°Y  , , , ,  \ V .",208Lr:f'V  E;" '" 255 L _23° V  (a) The motor phasor diagram for Exampl e 6-la. (b) Th e motor phasor diagram for Example 6- lb.  From the equation for power in tenns of torque angle [Equation (5-20)], it is pos­ sible to find the magnitude of the angle /j (remember that the magnitude of EA is  constant):  '0  p = 3VI/!EA sin Ii  X,  _ . _] XsP  ii-sill 3VE . ,  _ .
 _] (2.5 flX24.SS kW)  - Sill 3(20S V)(255 V)  = sin- ] 0.391 = 23°  (5-20)  The internal generated voltage thus become s EA = 355 L _23° V. Therefore, IA  will be given by  _ VI/! - EA  IA - 'X J ,  20SLooY-255L-23°Y = j2.5fl  SY N C HR O N OUS MOTORS 355  ,.,  ,b,  FIGURE 6-8  (a) A synchronous motor operating at a Jagging power factor. (b) The effect of an increase in field  current on the operation of this motor.  and IL will become  IL = V3IA = 7 1.4 A  The final power factor will be cos (-
ISO) or 0.966 leading.  The Effect of Field Current Changes on a  Synchronou s Motor  We have seen how a change in shaft load on a synchronous m otor affects the  m otor. There is one other quantity on a synchronous m otor that can be readily  adjusted- its field current. What effect does a change in field current have on a  synchronous m otor?  To find out, look at Figure 6--8. Figure 6--8a shows a synchronous m otor ini­ tially operating at a lagging power factor. N ow, increase its field curr
ent and see  what happens to the m otor. N ote that an increase in field current increases the  magnitude of E,t but does not affect the real power supplied by the motor. 1lle  power supplied by the m otor changes only when the shaft load torque changes.  Since a change in IF does not affect the shaft speed nm , and since the load attached  356 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Lagging  power  factor  PF '" 1.0  Leading  power  factor  FIGURE 6-9  IF Synchronous motor V curves.  to the shaft is u
nchanged, the real power supplied is unchanged. Of course, VT is  also constant, since it is kept constant by the power source supplying the mot or.  Th e distances proportional to power on the phasor diagram (EA sin 8 and IA cos ())  mu st therefore be constant. When the field current is increased, EA mu st increase,  but it can only do so by sliding out along the line of constant power. 111is effect is  show n in Figure 6--8b.  Notice that as the value ofEA increases, the ma gnitude of the ann
ature cur­ rent IA first decreases and then increases again. At low EA, the armature current is  lagging, and the m otor is an inductive load . It is acting like an inductor-resistor  comb ination, consumin g reactive power Q. A s the field current is increased, the  annature current eventually lines up with Vo/>, and the m otor looks purely resistive.  As the field current is increased further, the annature current becomes leading,  and the m otor becomes a capacitive load. 11 is now acting lik
e a capacitor-resistor  combination, consumin g negative reactive power -Q or, alternatively, supplying  reacti ve power Q to the system.  A plot of IA versus IF for a synchrono us m otor is shown in Figure 6-9. Such  a plot is called a synchronous motor V cu",e, for the obvious reason that it is  shaped like the letter V. There are several V curves drawn, corresponding to dif­ ferent real power levels. For each curve, the minimum armature current occurs at  unity power factor, when only real po
wer is being supplied to the m otor. At any  other point on the curve, some reactive power is being supplied to or by the m o­ tor as well. For field currents less than the value giving minimum lA, the annature  current is lagging, consumin g Q. For field currents greater than the value giving  the minimum lA, the annature current is leading, supplying Q to the power system  as a capacitor would. 111erefore, by controlling the field current of a synchronous  m otor, the reactive power supplied t
o or consumed by the power system can be  controlled.  Wh en the projection of the phasor EA onto V 0/> (EA cos 8) is shoner than V 0/>  itself, a synchronous mot or has a lagging current and consum es Q. Since the field  current is small in this situation, the m otor is said to be underexcited. On the other  hand, when the projection of EA onto Vo/> is longer than Vo/> itself, a synchronous  SYNC H RONOUS MOTORS 357  FIGU R E 6-10  (a) The phasor diagram of an underexcited synchronous motor. (b
) The phasor diagram of an  overexcited synchronous motor.  motor has a leading current and supplies Q to the power system. Since the field  current is large in this situation, the m otor is said to be overexcited. Phasor dia­ gram s illustrating these concepts are shown in Figure 6-10.  EXllmpl e 6-2. The 20S-V, 45-kVA, O.S-PF-Ieading, 8-cOIUlected, 60-H z synchro­ nous motor of the previous example is supplying a 15-hp load with an initial power factor  of 0.85 PF lagging. The field current I"
 at these conditions is 4.0 A.  (a) Sketch the initial phasor diagram of this motor, and fmd the values IA and EA.  (b) If the motor's flux is increased by 25 percent, sketch the new phasor diagram of  the motor. What are EA, lA, and the power factor of the motor now ?  (c) Assume that the flux in the motor varies linearly with the field current I". Make  a plot of 1..1 versus I" for the synchronous motor with a IS-hp load.  Solutioll  (a) From the previous example, the electric input power with
 all the losses included  is p~ = 13.69 kW. Since the motor's power factor is 0.85 lagging, the resulting  annature current flow is  I - n,R",~"::-;; A - 3VoIIcos(J  13.69 kW  = 3(20S V )(0.S5) = 25.8 A  The angle (J is cos-1 0.85 = 31.8°, so the phasor current 1..1 is equal to  1..1 = 25.8 L -31.So A  To find EA, apply Kirchhoff's voltage law [Equation (6--2)]:  EA = VoII - jXSIA  = 20S L 0° V - (j2.5 0)(25.8 L - 31.So A )  =2 0SLO o V - 64.5L5S.2° V  = 182L - 17.5° V  The resulting phasor diag
ram is shown in Figure 6- 11, together with the results  for part b.  358 ELECTR IC M AC HINE R Y RJNDAMENTALS  ,  ,  ,  I;' I  ,  I" ,  ,  ,  fV~"'208LOOV  EA ",182L - 17.5°Y .J '-E;' '" 227.5 L _ 13.9° Y  ""GU R E 6-11  The phasor diagram of the motor in Example 6--2.  (b) If the flux cp is increased by 25 percent, then EA = Kcpw will increase by 25 per­ cent too:  EA 2 = 1.25 EAI = 1.25(182 V) = 227.5 V  H owever, the power supplied to the load mu st remain constant. Since the dis­ tance EA s
in /) is proportional to the power, that distance on the phasor diagram  must be constant from the original flux level to the new flux level. Therefore,  E A] sin 8] = EA 2 sin ~  ~ = sin- t(EAt sin 8])  E"  The annature current can now be found from K irchhoff's voltage law:  _ VI/! - EA 2  1..1.2 - ·X J ,  I _ 208 LO° V - 227.5 L - 13.9° V  ..1. - j2.50  = 56.2 ~.~OA2° V = 22.5 L 13.2° A  Finally, the motor's power factor is now  PF = cos (13.2°) = 0.974 leading  The resulting phasor diagram i
s also shown in Figure 6-11.  (e) Because the flux is assumed to vary linearly with field current, EA will also vary  linearly with field current. We know that EA is 182 V for a field current of 4.0A,  so EA for any given field current can be fOlUld from the ratio  ~- ~ 182V -4.0A  (6-5)  SY N C HR O N OUS MOTORS 359  Th e torque angle lj for any given field current can be found from the fact that  the power supplied to the load mu st remain constant:  EA I sin 01 = EA 2 sin ~  ~ = sin-I (EA I s
in 01)  E"  (6-6)  Th ese two pieces of infonnation give us the phasor voltage EA. Once EA is avail­ able, the new armature current can be calculated from Kirchhoff's voltage law:  _ V</I - E A l  IA l - 'X J , (6-7)  A MATLAB M -file to calculate and plot IA versus IF using Equations (6-5)  through (6-7) is shown below:  % M-file : v_curve.m  % M-file c reate a p lo t o f a rm atur e c urre nt ver su s fie ld  % current fo r the syn chro n ou s m o t o r o f Exampl e 6 - 2 .  % Firs t , initia 
lize the fie ld curre nt values (21 va lues  % in the range 3 .S - 5.S A)  i_ f = (3S :1 :5S) / 1 0;  % Now initia lize a ll o ther values  i_a = z e ros(1 ,21 ) ;  x_s = 2.5;  v_p ha se = 20S;  del tal = -17 .5 .. p i /1 SO;  % Pre - a llocate i_a array  % Sy n chro n o u s reac tance  % Ph ase vo ltage at 0 degrees  % de lta 1 in radians  e_a l = l S2 .. (cos (delta l ) + j .. s in(delta l )) ;  % Ca l culate the armature current f o r each value  for ii = 1:21  ond  % Ca l culate magnitud e o
 f e _a2  e_a2 = 45.5 .. i_ f (ii) ;  % Ca l culate delta2  delta2 = asin ( abs (e_a l ) / abs (e_a2 ) .. s in(de ltal) ) ;  % Ca l culate the phasor e_a2  e_a2 = e_a2 " (cos (delta2 ) + j" s in(delta2 ));  % Ca l culate i_a  i_a(ii) = ( v_p ha se  % Plot the v - curve  p lot (i_ f. abs (i_a) , 'Co lor' , 'k' , 'Linew idth', 2.0) ;  x label ('Fie ld C urrent (A) ', 'Fo ntwe ight', 'So ld ') ;  y label ('A rmature C urrent (A) ', 'Fo ntwe ight' , 'So ld') ;  title (' Sy n c hro n o u s M o tor V 
-CUrve ' , 'Fo ntwe ight' , 'So ld ') ;  grid on;  The plot produced by this M -flle is shown in Fig ure 6-12. N ote that for a field current of  4.0 A, the annature current is 25.8 A. This result agrees with part a of this example.  360 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  30  29  28  < 27  "  ~ 26  ! 25  ~ 24  23  22  \  \  \  \  /  /  /  /  /  /  "  21  3.' 4.0 4.5 5.0 ,.5 6.0  Field current. A  ""GU R E 6-12  V curve for the synchronous motor of Ex ample 6--2.  Th e Sy nchronolls M otor and  P
ow er-Factor Co rrection  Figure 6-13 shows an infinite bus whose OUlpUI is connected through a transmis­ sion line 10 an industrial plant at a distant point. T he industrial plant show n con­ sists of three loads. Tw o of the loads are induction motors with lagging power fac­ tors, and the third load is a synchronous m otor with a variable power factor.  What does the ability to set the power factor of one of the loads do for the  power system ? To find out, examine the following example proble
m. (Note: A re­ view of the three-phase power equations and their uses is given in Appendix A.  Some readers ma y wish to consult it when studying this problem.)  Exa m ple 6-3. The infinite bus in Figure 6-13 operates at 480 V. Load I is an in­ duction motor consruning 100 kW at 0.78 PF lagging, and load 2 is an induction motor con­ sruning 200 kW at 0.8 PF lagging. Load 3 is a synchronous motor whose real power con­ srunption is 150 kW.  (a) If the synchronous m otor is adjusted to operate at 
0.85 PF lagging, what is the  transmission line current in this system?  (b) If the synchronous motor is adjusted to operale at 0.85 PF leading, what is the  transmission line current in this system ?  (c) A ssrune thai the transmission line losses are given by  line loss  where LL stands for line losses. H ow do the transmission losses compare in the  two cases?  p,.  -Infinite bus Transmission line -Q,.  Plant  FIGURE 6-13  S YN C H R O N O U S M O TOR S 361  ,----------------,  P,  --Q,  P,  
--'" P,  --Q,  Ind.  motor  Ind.  motor  Synchr.  motor  lOO kW  0.78 PF  lagging  200 kW  0.8PF  lagging  150 kW  PF = ?  L ________________ ~  A simple power system consisting of an infinite bus supplying an industrial plant through a  transmission line.  Solutioll  (a) In the first case, the real power of load I is 100 kW , and the reactive powe r of  load I is  Q l = P t tan ()  = (100 kW ) tan (cos-l 0.7S) = (100 kW ) tan 3S.7°  = SO .2 kVAR  Th e real pow er of load 2 is 200 kW , and the r
eactive pow er of load 2 is  Q 2= P2tan()  = (200 kW ) tan (cos-l O.SO) = (200 kW ) tan 36.S7°  = 150 kVAR  Th e real pow er load 3 is 150 kW . and the reactive powe r of load 3 is  Q]= p]tan()  = (150 kW ) tan (cos-l 0.S5) = (150 kW ) tan 3 1.So  = 93 kVAR  Thu s, the total real load is  P'o< = P t + P2 + p]  = lOO kW + 200 kW + 150 kW = 450 kW  and the total reactive load is  Q ,o<=Qt+ Q 2+Q]  = SO .2 kVAR + 150 kVAR + 93 kVAR = 323 .2 kVAR  Th e equivalent system powe r factor is thus  PF = c
os (J = cos (tan- I.2) = cos (tan- l 323 .2 kVAR ) P 450 kW  = cos 35.7° = 0.S l2 lagging  362 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Finally, the line current is given by  P trX 450 kW  IL = v'JVLcos 0 = v'J(480V)(0.812) = 667 A  (b) The real and reactive powers of loads I and 2 are unchanged, as is the real  power of load 3. The reactive power of load 3 is  Q3 = PJ tan()  = (150 kW) tan (_ cos-l 0.85) = (150 kW ) tan (_31.8°)  = -93 kVAR  Thus, the total real load is  P'fJI = PI + P2 + PJ  = lOOkW +
 200kW + 150kW = 450kW  and the total reactive load is  Q 'fJI=QI+Q 2+ Q3  = 80.2 kVAR + 150 kVAR - 93 kVAR = 137.2 kVAR  The equivalent system power factor is thus  PF = cos O = cos (tan-l Q) = cos (tan-l 137.2kVAR) P 450kW  = cos 16.96° = 0.957 lagging  Finally, the line current is given by  P'fJI 450 kW  IL = V3V L cos 0 = v'3(480 VXO.957) = 566 A  (e) The transmission losses in the first case are  The transmission losses in the second case are  Notice that in the second case the transmission
 power losses are 28 percent less  than in the first case, while the power supplied to the loads is the same.  As seen in the preceding examp le, the ability to adjust the power factor of  one or mor e loads in a pow er system can significantly affect the operating effi­ ciency of the power system. TIle lower the power factor of a system, the greater  the losses in the power lines feeding it. M ost loads on a typical power system are  induction motors, so pow er systems are alm ost invariably la
gging in power factor.  H aving one or more leading loads (overexcited synchronou s mot ors) on the sys­ tem can be useful for the fo llowin g reasons:  I. A leading load can supply som e reactive power Q for nearby lagging loads,  instead of it comin g from the generator. Since the reactive power does not  have to travel over the long and fairly high-resistance transmission lines, the  SYNC H RONOUS MOTORS 363  transmission line current is reduced and the power system losses are mu ch  lower. (
nlis was shown by the previous example.)  2. Since the transmission lines carry less current, they can be smaller for a given  rated power flow. A lowe r equipment current rating reduces the cost of a  power system significantly.  3. In addition, requiring a synchronous m otor to operate with a leading power  factor means that the m otor mu st be run overexcited. nlis mod e of operation  increases the motor's ma ximum torque and reduces the chance of acciden­ tally exceeding the pullout torque. 
 The use of synchronous m otors or other equipment to increase the overall  power factor of a power system is called power-factor correction. Since a syn­ chronous motor can provide power-factor correction and lowe r power system  costs, many loads that can accept a constant-speed m otor (even though they do not  necessarily need one) are driven by synchronous m otors. Even though a synchro­ nous m otor may cost more than an induction motor on an individual basis, the  ability to operate a synch
ronous m otor at leading power factors for power-factor  correction saves m oney for industrial plants. This results in the purchase and use  of synchronous motors.  Any synchronous m otor that exists in a plant is run overexcited as a matter  of course to achieve power-factor correction and to increase its pullout torque.  H oweve r, running a synchronous m otor overexcited requires a high field current  and flux, which causes significant rotor heating. An operator mu st be careful not  to over
heat the field windings by exceeding the rated field current.  T he Synchronolls Ca pacitor or  Sy nchronous Co ndenser  A synchronous m otor purchased to drive a load can be operated overexcited to  supply reactive power Q for a power system. In fact, at some times in the past a  synchronous m otor was purchased and run without a load, simply for power­ factor correction. nle phasor diagram of a synchronous motor operating overex­ cited at no load is show n in Figure 6- 14.  Since there is no p
ower being drawn from the m otor, the distances propor­ tional to power (Ell sin /j and III cos ()) are zero. Since the Kirchhoff's voltage law  equation for a synchronous m otor is  I,  I  (6-1)  ""GURE 6-14  The phasor diagram of a synchronous  Cllpacitor or synchronous condenser.  364 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  L agging  PF  (+ Q consumed)  Saturation  Leading  PF  (+ QsuppIied) L-________ ~ _________ ~  (a)  ""GU R E 6-15  ,b,  (a) The V curve of a synchronous capacitor. (b) The corr
esponding machine phasor diagram.  the quantity jXSIA. points to the left, and therefore the armature current IA. points  straight up. If V 4> and IA. are examined, the voltage-current relationship between  them looks like that of a capacitor. An overexcited synchronous m otor at no load  looks just like a large capacitor to the power system.  Some synchronous m otors used to be sold specifically for power-factor cor­ rection. 1llese ma chines had shafts that did not even com e through the frame
 of  the m otor- no load could be connected to them even if one wanted to do so. Such  special-purpose synchronous m otors were often called synchronous condensers or  synchronous capacitors. (Condenser is an old nam e for capacitor.)  1lle V curve for a synchronous capacitor is show n in Figure 6-15a. Since  the real power supplied to the ma chine is zero (except for losses), at unity power  factor the current fA. = D. As the field current is increased above that point, the line  current (and t
he reactive power supplied by the m otor) increases in a nearly linear  fashion until saturation is reached. Figure 6-I 5b shows the effect of increasing the  field current on the m otor's phasor diagram.  Today, conventional static capacitors are m ore economical to buy and use  than synchronous capacitors. H owever, some synchronous capacitors may still be  in use in older industrial plants.  6.3 STA RTIN G SYN C HRONO US MOTOR S  Section 6.2 explained the behavior of a synchronous m otor unde
r steady-state  conditions. In that section, the m otor was always assumed to be initially turning  at synchronous speed. What has not yet been considered is the question: H ow did  the m otor get to synchronous speed in the first place?  To understand the nature of the starting problem, refer to Figure 6- I 6. nlis  figure show s a 6D- H z synchronous m otor at the mom ent power is applied to its  stator windings. T he rotor of the m otor is stationary, and therefore the ma gnetic  D,  B,  f=O 
S  'find = 0  ,,'  FIGURE 6-16  SY N C HR O N OUS MOTORS 365  D, D,  • f=I1240s  w  'find = Counterclockwise  '{.u-/I= 111205  'find = 0  B,  ,b, ,,'  B, B,  w  't-t--B, w  1 = 31240 5 1=I/60s  'f;nd = clockwise 'f;nd = 0  ,d, ,.,  Staning problems in a synchronous motor---the torque alternates rapidly in m agnitude and direction.  so that the net 5taning torque is zero.  field DR is stationary. The stator ma gnetic field D s is starting to sw eep around the  m otor at synchronous speed.  Figure
 6-16a shows the ma chine at time t = 0 s, wh en DR and Ds are exactly  lined up. B y the induced-torque equation  (4-58)  the induced torque on the shaft of the rotor is zero. Figure 6--16b shows the situa­ tion at time t = 11240 s. In such a short time, the rotor has barely m oved, but the  stator ma gnetic field now points to the left. By the induced-torque equation, the  torque on the shaft of the rotor is now counterclockwise. Figure 6-16c show s  the situation at time t = 1/120 s. At that 
point DR and Ds point in opposite direc­ tions, and TiDd again equals zero. At t = 1160 s, the stator ma gnetic field now  points to the right, and the resulting torque is clockwise.  Finally, at t = 1/60 s, the stator ma gnetic field is again lined up with the ro­ tor ma gnetic field, and T iDd = O. During one electrical cycle, the torque was first  counterclockwise and then clockwisc, and the average torque over the complete  366 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  cycle wa s zero. What happens t
o the mot or is that it vibrates heavily with each  electrical cycle and finally overheats.  Such an approach to synchronous mot or starting is hardly satisfactory­ mana gers tend to frown on emp loyees wh o burn up their expensive equipm ent. So  just how can a synchronous m otor be started?  TIuee basic approaches can be used to safely start a synchronous m otor:  I. Reduce the speed of the stator mngneticfield to a low enough value that the  rotor can accelerate and lock in with it during one
 half-cycle of the ma gnetic  field's rotation. This can be done by reducing the frequency of the applied  electric power.  2. Use an extenwl prime mover to accelerate the synchronous m otor up to syn­ chronous speed, go through the paralleling procedure, and bring the ma chine  on the line as a generator. TIlen, turning off or disconnecting the prime mov er  wil I mak e the synchronous ma chine a motor.  3. Use damper windings or amortisseur windings. Th e function of damper  windings and their
 use in m otor starting will be explained below.  Ea ch of these approaches to synchronous m otor starting will be described  in turn.  Motor Starting by Reducing Electrical Frequency  I f the stator ma gnetic fields in a synchrono us m otor rotate at a low enough speed,  there will be no problem for the rotor to accelerate and to lock in with the stator  ma gnetic field. TIle speed of the stator ma gnetic fields can then be increased to  operating speed by gradually increasingf .. up to its nor
mal 50- or 6O- H z value.  TIlis approach to starting synchronous m otors mak es a lot of sense, but it  does have one big problem: Where does the variable electrical frequency corne  from? Regular power system s are very carefully regulated at 50 or 60 H z, so un­ til recently any variable-frequency voltage source had to com e from a dedicated  generator. Such a situation wa s obviously impractical except for very unusual  circumstances.  Today, things are different. Chapter 3 described the rec
tifier-inverter and the  cycloconverter, which can be used to convert a constant input frequency to any de­ sired output frequency. With the development of such mod ern solid-state variable­ frequency drive packages, it is perfectly possible to continuously control the elec­ trical frequency applied to the mot or all the wa y from a fraction of a hertz up to and  above full rated frequency. If such a variable-frequency drive unit is included in a  motor-control circuit to achieve speed control, 
then starting the synchronous m otor  is very easy- simply adjust the frequency to a very low value for starting, and then  raise it up to the desired operating frequency for normal running.  When a synchronous m otor is operated at a speed low er than the rated  speed, its internal generated voltage Ell = Kcpw will be smaller than normal. If Ell  is reduced in ma gnitude, then the terminal voltage applied to the m otor mu st be  SYNC H RONOUS MOTORS 367  reduced as well in order to keep the sta
tor current at safe levels. Th e voltage in  any variable-frequency drive or variable-frequency starter circuit mu st vary  roughly linearly with the applied frequency.  To learn more about such solid-state m otor-drive units, refer to Chapter 3  and R eference 9.  M otor Starting with an E xternal Prim e M over  The second approach to starting a synchronous m otor is to attach an external start­ ing m otor to it and bring the synchrono us ma chine up to full speed with the ex­ ternal mot or. 1l
1en the synchronous ma chine can be paralleled with its power sys­ tem as a generator, and the starting mot or can be detached from the shaft of the  ma chine. Once the starting motor is turned off, the shaft of the ma chine slows  down, the rotor ma gnetic field BR falls behind B ... " and the synchronous ma chine  starts to act as a m otor. Once paralleling is completed, the synchrono us m otor can  be loaded down in an ordinary fashion.  This whole procedure is not as preposterous as it sound
s, since man y syn­ chronous m otors are parts of motor-generator sets, and the synchronous ma chine  in the motor-generator set ma y be started with the other ma chine serving as the  starting mot or. Also, the starting m otor only needs to overcome the inertia of the  synchronous ma chine without a load- no load is attached until the m otor is par­ alleled to the power system. Since only the m otor's inertia mu st be overcome, the  starting m otor can have a much smaller rating than the synchr
ono us motor it  starts.  Since m ost large synchronous m otors have brushless excitation system s  m ounted on their shafts, it is often possible to use these exciters as starting m otors.  For many medium- size to large synchronous m otors, an external starting  m otor or starting by using the exciter may be the only possible solution, because  the power system s they are tied to may not be able to handle the starting currents  needed to use the amortisseur winding approach described next.  M 
otor Starting by Using Am ortisseur Wi ndings  B y far the m ost popular way to start a synchronous motor is to employ anwrtisseur  or damper windings. Amortisseur windings are special bars laid into notches  carved in the face of a synchronous m otor's rotor and then shorted out on each end  by a large shoT1ing ring. A pole face with a set of amortisseurwindings is show n in  Fig ure 6-17, and amortisseur windings are visible in Figures 5-2 and 5-4.  To understand what a set of amortisseur wind
ings does in a synchrono us  m otor, examine the stylized salient two -pole rotor shown in Figure 6- 18. This ro­ tor shows an amortisseur winding with the shorting bars on the ends of the two ro­ tor pole faces connected by wires. (This is not quite the way nonnal ma chines are  constructed, but it will serve beautifully to illustrate the point of the windings.)  Assume initially that the main rotor field winding is disconnected and that a  three-phase set of voltages is applied to the stator o
f this ma chine. When the  368  ELECTR IC  MAC HI NERY  RJNDAMENTALS  o  o  Shorting  "'"  Shorting  "'"  o  o  o  o  FI GU R E  6- 17  A rotor field pole for a synchronous  machine showing amortisseur  windings  in  the pole face.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Compan y.)  fo'I GU R E 6-18  A simplifi ed  diagram  of  a salie nt  two­ pole machine showing amortisseur  windings.  pow er is first applied  at  time  t  =  a  s,  assume that the  ma gnetic  fi e ld  Bs is  ve rti cal,  as  sho wn  
in  Fi gure 6- 19a. As  th e  ma gnetic  fi e ld  B s sweep s along  in  a counter­ clockwise direc ti o n,  it  induces a  vo ltage  in  the bars of  th e amortisseur winding  given  by  Equation (1-45):  where  ei!>d  =  (v x  B) • I  v  =  velocity of  th e bar  relative to the magn et ic  field  B  =  ma gne ti c nux density vector  I  =  len g th  of co ndu ctor  in  th e ma gnetic  fie ld  (1-45)   eind and i  out of page  ®®  w 1-+'--8.  00 00  00  eind and i  into page  I find = counterc
lockwise  Shorting  b=  (a) 1=05  eind and i  into page  00  00 00  '"  I find = counterclockwise  ". • • d . eind an J  ® ® out of page  (c) 1= 11120&  FIGU R E 6-19  SY N C H RO N OUS MOTORS 369  "0 0"  (b) 1=112405  0 0 00  +t)--u,  I find=O  0 0 0 0  (d) 1=312405  Th e development of a unidirectional torque with synchronous motor amonisseur windings.  T he bars at the top of the rotor are m ov ing to the right relative to the magn etic  field, so the resulting direction of the induced voltag
e is out of the page. Similarly,  the induced voltage is into the page in the bottom bars. Th ese voltages produce a  current flow out of the top bars and into the bottom bars, resulting in a winding  ma gnetic field B w pointing to the right. B y the induced-torque equation  370 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  the resulting torque on the bars (and the rotor) is counterclockwise.  Figure 6-19b shows the situation at t = 11240 s. H ere, the stator ma gnetic  field has rotated 90° while the rotor
 has barely m oved (it simply cannot speed up  in so short a time). At this point, the voltage induced in the amortisseur windings  is zero, because v is parallel to B. With no induced voltage, there is no current in  the windings, and the induced torque is zero.  Figure 6-19c shows the situation at t = 11120 s. Now the stator ma gnetic  field has rotated 900, and the rotor still has not m oved yet. TIle induced voltage  [given by Equation (1-45)] in the amortisseur windings is out of the page i
n the  bottom bars and into the page in the top bars. Th e resulting current flow is out of  the page in the bottom bars and into the page in the top bars, causing a ma gnetic  field B w to point to the left. 1lle resulting induced torque, given by  T;Dd = kBw x B s  is counterclockwise.  Finally, Figure 6-19d shows the situation at time t = 31240 s. H ere, as at  t = 11240 s, the induced torque is zero.  Notice that som etimes the torque is counterclockwise and som etimes it is  essentially zer
o, but it is always unidirectional. Since there is a net torque in a sin­ gle direction, the m otor's rotor speeds up. (1llis is entirely different from starting  a synchronous motor with its normal field current, since in that case torque is first  clockwise and then counterclockwise, averaging out to zero. In this case, torque is  always in the same direction, so there is a nonzero average torque.)  Although the m otor's rotor will speed up, it can never quite reach synchro­ nous speed. This i
s easy to understand. Suppose that a rotor is turning at synchro­ nous speed. Th en the speed of the stator ma gnetic field Bs is the sam e as the ro­ tor's speed, and there is no relative motion between Bs and the rotor. If there is no  relative motion, the induced voltage in the windings will be zero, the resulting  current flow will be zero, and the winding ma gnetic field will be zero. Th erefore,  there will be no torque on the rotor to keep it turning. Even though a rotor cannot  speed up 
all the way to synchronous speed, it can get close. It gets close enough  to n'YD< that the regular field current can be turned on, and the rotor will pull into  step with the stator ma gnetic fields.  In a real ma chine, the field windings are not open-circuited during the start­ ing procedure. If the field windings were open-circuited, then very high voltages  wou ld be produced in them during starting. I f the field winding is short-circuited  during starting, no dangerous voltages are produc
ed, and the induced field current  actually contributes extra starting torque to the motor.  To summarize, if a ma chine has amortisseur windings, it can be started by  the follow ing procedure:  I. Disconnect the field windings from their dc power source and short them out.  SY N C HR O N OUS MOTORS 371  2. App ly a three-phase voltage to the stator of the m otor, and let the rotor accel­ erate up to near-synchronous speed. The m otor should have no load on its  shaft, so that its speed can app
roach n.ync as closely as possible.  3. Connect the dc field circuit to its pow er source. After this is done, the m otor  will lock into step at synchronous speed, and loads may then be added to its  shaft.  The Effect of Amortisseur Windings  on Motor Stability  If amortisseur windings are added to a synchronous ma chine for starting, we get  a free bonus-an increase in ma chine stability. The stator mag netic field rotates at  a constant speed n.YD<, which varies only w hen the system frequen
cy varies. I f the  rotor turns at n,YD<, then the amortisseur windings have no induced voltage at all.  If the rotor turns slower than n,YD<, then there will be relative m otion between the  rotor and the stator ma gnetic field and a voltage will be induced in the windings.  nlis voltage produces a current flow, and the current flow produces a ma gnetic  field. Th e interaction of the two ma gnetic fields produces a torque that tends to  speed the ma chine up again. On the other hand, if the ro
tor turns faster than the  stator mag netic field, a torque will be produced that tries to slow the rotor down.  Thu s, the torque produced by the anwrtisseur windings speeds up slow mnch ines  and slows down fast machines.  Th ese windings therefore tend to dampen out the load or other transients on  the m achine. It is for this reason that amortisseur windings are also called damper  windings. Am ortisseur windings are also used on synchronous generators, w here  they serve a similar stabilizi
ng function when a generator is operating in parallel  with other generators on an infinite bus. If a variation in shaft torque occurs on the  generator, its rotor will m om entarily speed up or slow down, and these changes  will be opposed by the am ortisseur windings. Amortisseur windings imp rove the  overall stability of power system s by reducing the ma gnitude of power and torque  transients.  Amortisseur windings are responsible for m ost of the subtransient current in  a faulted synchron
ous ma chine. A short circuit at the terminals of a generator is  just another fonn of transient, and the amortisseur windings respond very quickly  to it.  6.4 SYNCHRONOUS GENERATORS AND  SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS  A synchronous generator is a synchronous m achine that converts me chanical  power to electric power, while a synchronous m otor is a synchronous m achine  that converts electric powe r to m echanical power. In fact, they are both the same  physical ma chine.  372 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDA
MENTALS  Supply Consume  reactive power E" cos {j > V6 reactive power E" cos {j < V.  Q Q  Supply  pow~  P  E, E,  "  ~. ~\V • , , o •  ~ I,  E" leads  V.  Consume  pow~  p  I,  "  ~ ~V' ~  E ,  E" Jags E,  V,  ""GU R E 6-10  Phasor diagrams showing the generation and consumption of real power P and reactive power Q by  synchronous generators and motors.  A synchronous ma chine can supply real power to or consume real power  from a power system and can supply reactive power to or consum e reacti
ve power  from a power system. All four combinations of real and reactive power flows are  possible, and Figure 6-20 shows the phasor diagrams for these conditions.  Notice from the figure that  I. T he distinguishing characteristic of a synchronous generator (supplying P ) is  that E" lies ahead o/V", while for a m otor E" lies behind V",.  2. T he distinguishing characteristic of a ma chine supplying reactive power Q is  that E" cos lj > V", regardless of whether the ma chine is acting as a ge
nerator or  as a m otor. A ma chine that is consuming reactive power Q has E" cos lj < V",.  6.5 S YN C HRONO US MOTOR RATING S  Since synchronous m otors are the same physical ma chines as synchronous genera­ tors, the basic ma chine ratings are the sam e. The one major difference is that a large  SYNC HR ONOUS MOTORS  373  '"  GENERAL@  ELECTRIC  "  SYNCHRONOUS  MOTOR  FIGURE 6-21  A typical nameplate for a large synchronous motor.  (Courtesy o!General Electric Company.)  Ell  gives a  leading
  power factor  in stead  of  a  la gg in g one, and therefore  th e effect  of  the  maximum field current limit is expressed as a rating  at  a  leading  power  fa ctor.  Also, s in ce the output  of  a synchronous m otor is m echanical power, a synchronous  m otor 's  power rating is usually gi ve n in horsepower rather than  kil owa tt s.  TIl e nam eplate of a large synchronous m otor is shown  in  Fi g ur e 6-21.  In  addition to the information show n in the figure, a smaller synchronous 
m otor  would  ha ve  a service  fa ctor on  it s nam ep lat e.  In  general, synchronous m otors are m ore adaptable to low-speed,  hi gh­ power applications than induc ti on m otors (see Chapter 7). They are  th erefore  co mm o nl y used for low-speed,  hi gh-powe r loads.  6.6 SUMMARY  A synchronous m otor is the same physical ma c hin e as a synchronous generator,  except that  th e direction  of  real power  fl ow is reversed. S in ce synchronous m otors  are usually co nn ected to power s
ystem s containing generators  mu ch larger than  th e m otors, the frequency and tenninal  vo ltage  of  a synchronous m otor are  fix ed  (i.e., the power system looks like  an  infinite bus to the m otor).  Th e speed  of  a synch ro nous m ot or  is constant from no load to  th e ma ximum  possible load on the m otor. Th e speed  of  rotation is  _ _ 1 20..r.:  nm  - n sync - p  Th e ma ximum possible power a ma chine can produce is  _ 3 V1>E A  P m:u.- X  ,  (5 -21)   374 ELECTRIC MACHINERY
 RJNDAMENTALS  If this value is exceeded, the rotor will not be able to stay locked in with the sta­ tor ma gnetic fields, and the m otor will slip poles.  I f the field current of a synchronous motor is varied while its shaft load re­ main s constant, then the reactive power supplied or consumed by the mot or will  vary. If Ell cos 8 > ~, the m otor will supply reactive power , while if Ell cos 8< Vo/»  the m otor will consum e reactive power.  A synchronous m otor has no net starting torque an
d so cannot start by itself.  TIlere are three main wa ys to start a synchronous m otor:  I. Redu ce the stator frequency to a safe starting level.  2. U se an external prime m over.  3. Put amortisseur or damper windings on the motor to accelerate it to near­ synchronous speed before a direct current is app lied to the field windings.  If damper windings are present on a motor, they will also increase the sta­ bility of the m otor during load transients.  QUESTIONS  6-1. What is the difference 
between a synchronous motor and a synchronous generator?  6-2. What is the speed regulation of a synchronous motor?  6-3. When would a synchronous motor be used even though its constant-speed charac- teristic was not needed?  6-4. Why can't a synchronous motor start by itself?  6-5. What techniques are available to start a synchronous motor?  6-6. What are amortisseur windings? Why is the torque produced by them unidirectional  at starting, while the torque produced by the main field winding alt
ernates direction?  6-7. What is a synchronous capacitor? Why would one be used?  6-8. Explain, using phasor diagrams, what happens to a synchronous motor as its field  current is varied. Derive a synchronous motor V curve from the phasor diagram.  6-9. Is a synchronous motor's field circuit in more danger of overheating when it is op­ erating at a leading or at a lagging power factor? Explain, using phasor diagrams.  6-10. A synchronous motor is operating at a fixed real load, and its field cur
rent is in­ creased. If the armature current falls, was the motor initially operating at a lagging  or a leading power factor?  6-11. Why mu st the voltage applied to a synchronous motor be derated for operation at  frequencies lower than the rated value?  PROBLEMS  6-1. A 480-V, 60 H z four-pole synchronous motor draws 50 A from the line at unity  power factor and full load. Assuming that the motor is lossless, answer the follow­ ing questions:  (a) What is the output torque of this motor? Expr
ess the answer both in newton­ meters and in pound-feet.  SY N C HR O N OUS MOTORS 375  (b) What must be done to change the power factor to 0.8 leading? Explain your an­ swer, using phasor diagrams.  (c) What will the magnitude of the line current be if the power factor is adjusted to  0.8 leading?  6-2. A 480-V, 60 H z 4OO-hp, 0.8-PF -Ieading, six-pole, ~-connected synchronous motor  has a synchronous reactance of 1.1 {} and negligible annature resistance. Ignore its  friction, windage, and cor
e losses for the purposes of this problem.  (a) If this motor is initially supplying 400 hp at 0.8 PF lagging, what are the mag­ nitudes and angles of EA and IA ?  (b) H ow much torque is this motor producing? What is the torque angle O? H ow  near is this value to the maximum possible induced torque of the motor for this  field current setting?  (c) If lEAl is increased by IS percent, what is the new magnitude of the armature  current? What is the motor's new power factor?  (d) Calculate and pl
ot the motor's V curve for this load condition.  6-3. A 2300-V, I()(X)-hp, 0.8-PF leading, 60-H z, two-pole, Y-cotulected synchronous mo­ tor has a synchronous reactance of2.8 n and an annature resistance of 0.4 n. At 60  H z, its friction and windage losses are 24 kW, and its core losses are 18 kW. The  field circuit has a dc voltage of2oo V, and the maximwn IF is 10 A. The open-circuit  characteristic of this motor is shown in Figure P6-1. Answer the following ques­ tions about the motor, assu
ming that it is being supplied by an infinite bus.  (a) H ow much field current would be required to make this machine operate at  tulity power factor when supplying full load?  (b) What is the motor's efficiency at full load and unity power factor?  (c) If the field current were increased by 5 percent, what would the new value of  the annature current be? What would the new power factor be? H ow much re­ active power is being consumed or supplied by the motor?  (d) What is the maximrun torque t
his machine is theoretically capable of supplying  at tulity power factor? At 0.8 PF leading?  6-4. Plot the V curves (fA versus IF) for the synchronous motor of Problem 6-3 at no­ load, half-load, and full-load conditions. (Note that an electronic version of the  open-circuit characteristics in Figure P6-1 is available at the book's website. It may  simplify the calculations required by this problem. Also, you may assrune that RA is  negligible for this calculation.)  6-5. If a 60-H z synchrono
us motor is to be operated at 50 H z, will its synchronous reac­ tance be the same as at 60 H z, or will it change? (Hint: Think about the derivation  of X s.)  6-6. A 480-V, lOO-kW, 0.85-PF -Ieading, 50-H z, six-pole, V-connected synchronous mo­ tor has a synchronous reactance of 1.5 n and a negligible annature resistance. The  rotational losses are also to be ignored. This motor is to be operated over a continu­ ous range of speeds from 300 to 1000 rlmin, where the speed changes are to be ac­ 
complished by controlling the system frequency with a solid-state drive.  (a) Over what range mu st the input frequency be varied to provide this speed con­ trol range?  (b) H ow large is EA at the motor's rated conditions?  (c) What is the maximwn power that the motor can produce at rated speed with the  EA calculated in part (b)?  (d) What is the largest EA could be at 300 r/min?  376 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  3(XX)  2750  2500  2250  2(XX)  1750  1500  1250  IlXXl  750  250 /  / o  0
.0  ""GU R E 1'(;-1  /  /  /  1.0 2.0  /"  /  /  /  /  3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0  Field current. A  The open-circuit characteristic for the motor in Problems 6-3 and 6-4.  7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0  (e) As suming that the applied voltage V. is derated by the same amOlUlt as EA.  what is the maximwn power the motor could supply at 300 r/min?  if) H ow does the power capability of a synchronous motor relate to its speed?  6-7. A 20S-V. Y-connected synchronous motor is drawing 40 A at unity power factor  from a 20S-V
 power system. The field current flowing under these conditions is  2.7 A. Its synchronous reactance is O.S n. Assume a linear open-circuit characteristic.  (a) Find the torque angle o.  (b) H ow much field current would be required to make the motor operate at O.S PF  leading?  (c) What is the new torque angle in part b?  6-8. A synchronous machine has a synchronous reactance of 2.0 n per phase and an ar­ mature resistance of 0.4 n per phase. If EA = 460 L -80 V and V. = 4S0 L 0° V, is  this ma
chine a motor or a generator? H ow much power P is this machine consum­ ing from or supplying to the electrical system? H ow much reactive power Q is this  machine consuming from or supplying to the electrical system?  S YN C H R O N O U S M O TOR S 377  6-9. Figure P6--2 shows a synchronous mot or phasor diagram for a m otor operating at a  leading pow er factor w ith no R". For this m otor. the torque angle is given by  ~X~,J~'!;;CO~'~''-co tan 0 = -;- VI/! + Xsl" sin ()  _, ( Xsl" cos () ) • 
- tan - VI/! + Xi " sin ()  D erive an equation for the torque angle of the synchronous m otor if the amlature re­ sistance is included.  , , , ,  FIGURE P6-2  , , , , . , Xsl" Sin 0  V. \,"---"  --'1  ,  jXsl" 0: Xsl" cos ()  ,  P hasor diagram of a motor at a Jeading power factor.  6-10. A 4S0-V, 375-kVA , O.S-PF -Iagging, V -connected synchronous generator has a syn­ chronous reactance of 0.4 n and a negligible arm ature resistance. This generator is  supplying powe r to a 4S0-V, SO-kW , 0 .8
-PF-Ieading, V-connected synchronous m o­ tor w ith a synchronous reactance of 1.1 n and a negligible annature resistance. Th e  synchronous generator is adjusted to have a terminal voltage of 480 V w hen the m o­ tor is draw ing the rated powe r at unity powe r factor.  (a) Ca lculate the m agnitudes and angles of E" for both m achines.  (b) If the flux of the m otor is increased by 10 percent, w hat happens to the tenni­ nal voltage of the pow er system ? Wh at is its new value?  (c) Wh at is 
the powe r factor of the m otor after the increase in m otor flux?  6-11 , A 4S0-V, lOO- kW , 50-H z, four-pole, V-connected synchronous m otor has a rated  pow er factor of 0.S5 Ieading. At full load, the efficiency is 9 1 percent. Th e ann ature  resistance is O.OS n, and the synchronous reactance is 1.0 n. Find the follow ing  quantities for this m achine wh en it is operating at full load:  (a) Output torque  (b) Input pow er  (c) n ..  (d) E"  (e) 11,,1  if) P coov  (g) P mocb + P core + P 
""'Y  378 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  6-12. Th e V-connected synchronous m otor whose nam eplate is shown in Figure 6-21 has  a per-unit synchronous reactance of 0.9 and a per-unit resistance of 0.02.  (a) What is the rated input power of this m otor?  (b) What is the ma gnitude of EA at rated conditions?  (c) If the input power of this m otor is 10 MW . what is the ma ximum reactive  power the m otor can simultaneously supply? Is it the annature current or the  field current that limits t
he reactive power output?  (d) H ow mu ch power does the field circuit consum e at the rated conditions?  (e) What is the efficiency of this m otor at full load?  if) What is the output torque of the m otor at the rated conditions? Express the an­ swer both in newton-m eters and in pound-feet.  6-13. A 440-V. three-phase. V-connected synchronous motor has a synchronous reactance  of 1.5 n per phase. The field ClUTent has been adjusted so that the torque angle 0 is  28° when the power supplied by
 the generator is 90 kW.  (a) What is the ma gnitude of the internal generated voltage EA in this ma chine?  (b) What are the ma gnitude and angle of the armature current in the ma chine?  What is the m otor's power factor?  (c) If the field current remains constant. wha t is the absolute maximum power this  motor could supply?  6-14. A 460-V, 200-kVA. 0.80-PF-Ieading. 400-H z. six-pole. V-connected synchronous  m otor has negligible armature resistance and a synchronous reactance of 0.50 per  u
nit. Ignore all losses.  (a) What is the speed of rotation of this m otor?  (b) What is the output torque of this m otor at the rated conditions?  (c) What is the internal generated voltage of this m otor at the rated conditions?  (d) With the field ClUTent rema ining at the value present in the m otor in part c. wha t  is the maximwn possible output power from the m achine?  6-15. A lOO -hp. 440-V. 0.8-PF -Ieading. 6.-cormected synchronous m otor has an annature  resistance of 0.22 n and a sync
hronous reactance of 3.0 O. Its efficiency at full load  is 89 percent.  (a) What is the input power to the m otor at rated conditions?  (b) What is the line ClUTent of the m otor at rated conditions? What is the phase cur­ rent of the m otor at rated conditions?  (c) What is the reactive power consum ed by or supplied by the m otor at rated  conditions?  (d) What is the internal generated voltage EA of this m otor at rated conditions?  (e) What are the stator copper losses in the m otor at rate
d conditions?  if) What is P OOIIV at rated conditions?  (g) If EA is decreased by 10 percent. how mu ch reactive power will be consum ed  by or supplied by the m otor?  6-16. An swer the follow ing questions about the m achine of Problem 6-15.  (a) If EA = 430 L 13.5° V and V. = 440 L 0° V. is this m achine consumin g real  power from or supplying real power to the power system ? Is it consuming re­ active power from or supplying reactive power to the power system?  (b) Calculate the real power
 P and reactive power Q supplied or consum ed by the  m achine under the conditions in part a. Is the m achine operating w ithin its rat­ ings nnder these circum stances?  SYNC HR ONOUS MOTORS 379  (c) If E,\ = 470 L _1 20 V and V. = 440 L 00 V, is this machine consuming real  power from or supplying real power to the power system? Is it consuming re­ active power from or supplying reactive power to the power system ?  (d) Calculate the real power P and reactive power Q supplied or consruned by 
the  machine WIder the conditions in part c. Is the machine operating within its rat­ ings under these circumstances?  REFERENCES  1. Chaston. A. N. Electric Machinery. R eston. Va.: R eston Publishing. 1986.  2. Del Toro. V. Electric Machines atuf Pov.·er Systems. Englewood Cliffs. NJ : Prentice-H all.  1985.  3. Fitzgerald. A. E.. and C. Kingsley. Jr. Electric Machinery. N ew York: M cGraw- H ilL 1952.  4. Fitzgerald. A. E.. C. Kingsley. Jr .. and S. D. Umans. Electric Machinery, 5th ed. N ew 
York:  McGr aw- H ill. 1990.  5. Ko sow. lrving L. Control of Electric Motors. En glewood Cliffs. N.J.: Prentice-H all. 1972.  6. Liwschitz..Garik. Mi chaeL and Clyde Whipple. Alternating-Current Machinery. Princeton. N.J.:  Van No strand. 1961.  7. N asar. Syed A. (ed.). Ha ndbook of Electric Machines. N ew York: M cGraw- H ill. 1987.  8. Siemon. G. R., and A. Straughen. Electric Ma chines. R eading. M ass.: Addison-Wesley. 1980.  9. Vithayathil. Joseph. PO'we, Electronics: P rinciples and Appl
ications. N ew YorK: McGr aw- Hill.  1995.  10. Werninck. E. H . (ed.). Electric MOlOr H andaook. London: McGr aw- H ill. 1978.  CHAPTER  7  INDUCTION MOTORS  I n the last chapter, we saw how amortisseur windings on a synchronous motor  cau Id develop a starting torque without the necessity of supplyi ng an external  field current to them. In fact, amortisscur windings work so well that a motor  could be built without the synchronous mot or's main de field circuit at all. A ma­ chine with only a
mortisseur windings is called an induction machine. Such ma­ chines are called induction ma chines because the rotor voltage (which produces  the rotor current and the rotor ma gnetic field) is induced in the rotor windings  rather than being physically connected by wires. The distinguishing feature of an  induction motor is that no de field current is required to run the ma chine.  Although it is possible to use an induction ma chine as either a m otor or a  generator, it has many disadvantages
 as a generator and so is rarely used in that  manner. For this reason, induction ma chines are usually referred to as induction  motors.  7.1 INDUCTION MOTOR CONSTRUCTION  An induction motor has the same physical stator as a synchronous ma chine, with  a different rotor construction. A typical two-pole stator is show n in Figure 7-1. It  looks (and is) the sam e as a synchronous ma chine stator. TIlere are two different  types of induction m otor rotors which can be placed inside the stator. On
e is called  a cage rotor, while the other is called a wound rotor.  Figures 7-2 and 7-3 show cage induction motor rotors. A cage induction  motor rotor consists ofa series of conducting bars laid into slots carved in the face  of the rotor and shorted at either end by large shoT1ing rings. This design is re­ ferred to as a cage rotor because the conductors, if examined by themselves,  would look like one of the exercise wheels that squirrels or ham sters run on.  380  ,ore  FI G URE  7- 2  Cond
octor  rings  Rotor  rotor  conductors  INDU CT IO N M O TO RS  381  FI G URE  7- 1  Th e stator  of  a typical induction  motor. showing the stator  windings.  (Courlesy  of  M agneTek, Inc.)  ,.,  ,b,  (a) Sketch  of  cage rotor. (b) A typical cage rotor.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)   382  ELECTRIC  MACHINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  ,,'  ,b,  ""GURE 7-3  (a) Cutaway diagram  of  a typical small cage rotor induction motor.  (Courtesy  of  M a8neTek.  In c.)  (b) Cutaway diagram  of  a typic
al large cage  TOIor  induction motor.  (Cou nesy  ofGeneml  Electric  Company.)  TIl e other type  of  rotor is a w o und  rotor. A  wound rotor  ha s a co mpl ete set  of  three-phase windings that are mirror images of the windings on  th e stato r.  The  three phases of  th e rotor windin gs  are usually  V- co nn ecte d,  and  th e e nd s of the  three rotor wires are  ti ed to slip rings on  th e rotor's shaft.  TIl e rotor windings are  shorted through brushes riding  on  th e slip  rin gs
. Wound-rotor induc ti on motors  th erefore have their rotor currents accessible  at  the stator brushes,  wh ere they can  be  ex amined and where extra resistance can  be  in serted into  the  rotor circuit.  It  is  possible  to  tak e advantage  of  this feature to modify the torque-speed characte ri s­ ti c of the m o tor.  Tw o wound rotors are sho wn  in  Fi gure  7-4,  and a complete  wound-rotor induction m otor is sho wn  in  Fi g ure  7-5.   INDU CT IO N M O TO RS  383  (a)  ,b,  FI 
G URE 7-4  Typical wound rotors for induction motors. N otice  the slip rings and the bars connecting the rotor  windings to the slip rings.  (Courtel)'  ofGeneml  Electric Compan y.)  FI G URE  7- 5  Cuta.way diagram  of  a.  wound-rotor induction mo tor. N otice the brushes and slip rings. Also notice  that the rotor windings are skewed  to  eliminate slot  h3.ITllonics.  (Courtesy  of  M agneTe/:. Inc.)   384 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Wou nd-rotor induction m otors are m ore expensiv
e than cage induction m o­ tors, and they require mu ch m ore maintenance because of the wear associated  with their brushes and slip rings. As a result, wound-rotor induction motors are  rarely used.  7.2 BASIC INDUCTION MOTOR CONCEPTS  Induction m otor operation is basically the srune as that of amortisseur windings on  synchronous m otors. Th at basic operation will now be reviewed, and some im­ portant induction m otor tenn s will be defined.  The Development of Induced Torque  in an Inducti
on Motor  Figure 7--6 shows a cage rotor induction m otor. A three-phase set of voltages has  been applied to the stator, and a three-phase set of stator currents is flow ing. Th ese  currents produce a ma gnetic field B s, which is rotating in a counterclockwise  direction.1lle speed of the ma gnetic field's rotation is given by  (7-1)  where Ie is the system frequency in hertz and P is the number of poles in the ma­ chine. This rotating magnetic field Bs passes over the rotor bars and induces 
a  voltage in them.  1lle voltage induced in a given rotor bar is given by the equation  eioo = (v x H) • I  where v = velocity of the bar relative to the magnetic field  B = ma gnetic flux density vector  I = length of conductor in the ma gnetic field  (1-45)  It is the relative m otion of the rotor compared to the stator ma gnetic field  that produces induced voltage in a rotor bar. Th e velocity of the upper rotor bars  relative to the ma gnetic field is to the right, so the induced voltage i
n the upper  bars is out of the page, while the induced voltage in the lowe r bars is into the page.  nlis results in a current flow out of the upper bars and into the lower bars. H ow­ ever, since the rotor assembly is inductive, the peak rotor current lags behind the  peak rotor voltage (see Figure 7--6b). The rotor current flow produces a rotor ma g­ netic field HR.  Finally, since the induced torque in the ma chine is given by  (4-58)  the resulting torque is counterclockwise. Since the roto
r induced torque is coun­ terclockwise, the rotor accelerates in that direction.  Maximum  induced voltage  , , ,  @ @  @ 0  @  • 0  0  0  " " " " ,.,  II, N et voltage  ,  I ER , , I, , , , , ,  @ 0  @  • ,  0  , , ,  IIi',  0  , , , ,  0 ,  " " " ,,'  0  0  "  0  0  INDUCT ION MOTORS 385  Maximum  induced voltage  Maximum ,  induced current , ,  " IR H, ,  @ 0  @ 0  • ,  0  ,  0 , ,  0  ,  "  , , ,  0 ,  " " " ,b,  ""CURE 7-6  The development of induced torque in an induction  motor. (a) Th e 
rotating stator field lis induces a voUage  in the rotor bars; (b) the rotor voltage produces a rotor  currem flow. which lags behind the voUage because of  the inductance of the rotor; (c) the rotor currem  produces a rotor magnetic field liN lagging 90° behind  itself. and liN imeracts with II ... to produce a  counterclockwise torque in the machine.  Th ere is a fmite upper limit to the motor's speed, however. If the induction  m otor's rotor were turning at synchronous speed, then the rotor 
bars wou ld be sta­ tionary relative to the magnetic field and there would be no induced voltage. If eioo  were equal to 0, then there w ould be no rotor current and no rotor ma gnetic field.  With no rotor ma gnetic field, the induced torque would be zero, and the rotor  would slow down as a result of friction losses. An induction motor can thus speed  up to near-synchronous speed, but it can never exactly reach synchronous speed.  Note that in nonnal operation both the rotor and stator mngneti
c fields BR  and Bs rotate together at synchronous speed n,yDC' while the rotor itselftums at a  slower speed.  386 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  The Co ncept of Rotor Slip  TIle voltage induced in a rotor bar of an induction mot or depend s on the speed of  the rotor relative to the magnetic fields. Si nce the behavior of an induction m otor  depend s on the rotor's voltage and current, it is often m ore logical to talk about  this relative speed. Tw o tenns are comm only used to define the 
relative motion of  the rotor and the ma gnetic fields. One is slip speed, defined as the difference be­ tween synchronous speed and rotor speed:  where n.up = slip speed of the ma chine  n,yDC = speed of the ma gnetic fields  nm = me chanical shaft speed of motor  (7-2)  TIle other tenn used to describe the relative m otion is slip, which is the rela­ tive speed expressed on a per-unit or a percentage basis. That is, slip is defined as  " " s = ~(x 100%) n sync  (7- 3)  " - n s = 'YDC m(x 100%)
  n.".  (7-4)  lllis equation can also be expressed in terms of angular velocity w (radians per  second) as  W - W  S = sync m(x 100%)  w~oc  (7-5)  Notice that if the rotor turns at synchronous speed, s = 0, while if the rotor is sta­ tionary, s = 1. All normal m otor speeds fall somewhere between those two limits.  It is possible to express the me chanical speed of the rotor shaft in tenns of  synchronous speed and slip. So lving Equations (7-4) and (7-5) for me chanical  speed yields  I nm = 
(1 - s)n,yDC I (7-6)  "'  I w m ~ (I - s)w ,ync I (7-7)  lllese equations are useful in the derivation of induction motor torque and pow er  relationships.  The Electrical Frequency on the Rotor  An induction m otor w orks by inducing voltages and currents in the rotor of the  ma chine, and for that reason it has sometime s been called a rotating transformer.  Like a transformer, the primary (stator) induces a voltage in the secondary (rotor),  INDUCT ION MOTORS 387  but unlike a transfonner, th
e secondary frequency is not necessarily the sam e as  the primary frequency.  If the rotor of a m otor is locked so that it cannot move, then the rotor will  have the sam e frequency as the stator. On the other hand, if the rotor turns at syn­ chronous speed, the frequency on the rotor will be zero. What will the rotor fre­ quency be for any arbitrary rate of rotor rotation?  At nm = 0 rlmin, the rotor frequency fr = Jr, and the slip s = I. At nm = n,ync'  the rotor frequency fr = 0 H z, and th
e slip s = O. For any speed in between, the ro­ tor frequency is directly proportional to the difference between the speed of the ma g­ netic field n.ync and the speed of the rotor nm. Since the slip of the rotor is defined as  (7-4)  the rotor frequency can be expressed as  (7-8)  Several alternative fonn s of this expression exist that are som etimes useful. One  of the m ore comm on expressions is deri ved by substituting Equation (7-4) for the  slip into Equation (7--8) and then substituting
 for n,ync in the denominator of the  expression:  But n,yDC = 120 fr I P [from Equation (7- 1 )], so  T herefore,  (7-9)  Exa mpl e 7-1. A 20S-V, lO-hp, four-pole, 60-H z, V-connected induction motor has  a full-load slip of 5 percent.  (a) What is the synchronous speed of this motor?  (b) What is the rotor speed of this motor at the rated load?  (c) What is the rotor frequency of this motor at the rated load?  (d) What is the shaft torque of this motor at the rated load?  Solution  (a) The syn
chronous speed of this motor is  _ 120f,. n,ync - - p- = 120(60 Hz) _  4 poles - ISOOr /min  (7- 1)  388 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (b) The rotor speed of the motor is given by  n", = (I - s)n.yDC  = (I - 0.95)(l800r/min) = 17lOr/min  (c) The rotor frequency of this motor is given by  Ir = s/e = (0.05)(60 H z) = 3 H z  Alternatively, the frequency can be found from Equation (7-9):  p  /, = 120 (n,ync - nm )  = lio(l800r/min - 17IOr/min) = 3 H z  (d) The shaft load torque is given by  (10
 hpX746 W /hp)  = (l7IOr/min)(2'lTrad/rXI min/60s) = 41.7N o m  The shaft load torque in English units is given by Equation (1-17):  5252P  (7--6)  (7--8)  (7-9)  where 'Tis in pOlUld-feet, P is in horser.ower, and n .. is in revolutions per minute.  Therefore,  5252(10 hp)  Tload = 17lOr/min = 30.71bo ft  7.3 THE EQUI VA LENT C IRCU IT OF  A N IND UC TION MOTOR  An induction m otor relies for its operation on the induction of voltages and cur­ rents in its rotor circuit from the stator circuit 
(transformer action). Be cause the in­ du ction of voltages and currents in the rotor circuit of an induction m otor is es­ sentially a transform er operation, the equivalent circuit of an induction m otor will  turn o ut to be very similar to the equivalent circuit of a transfonner. An induction  mot or is called a singly excited ma chine (as oppo sed to a doubly excited synchro­ nous ma chine), since pow er is supp lied to only the stator circuit. Be cause an in­ duction m otor does not have a
n independent field circuit, its mod el will not con­ tain an internal voltage source such as the internal generated voltage E,t in a  synchronous ma chine.  lt is possible to derive the equivalent circuit of an induction mot or from a  knowled ge of transformers and from what we already know about the variation of  rotor frequency with speed in induction m otors. TIle induction m otor mod el will be  v,  INDUCT ION MOTORS 389  I, R, I, I,  - - - I. j + +  Rc jXM E,  - FIGURE 7-7  Th e transform
er model or an induction motor. with rotor and stator connected by an ideal  transformer of turns ratio a,/f"  developed by starting with the transformer mod el in Chapter 2 and then deciding  how to take the variable rotor frequency and other similar induction motor effects  into account.  T he Transform er M odel of an Induction M otor  A transfonner per-phase equivalent circuit, representing the operation of an in­ duction m otor, is shown in Figure 7-7. As in any transfonner, there is a cert
ain re­ sistance and self-inductance in the primary (stator) windings, which mu st be rep­ resented in the equivalent circuit of the ma chine. Th e stator resistance will be  called R 1• and the stator leakage reactance will be called X l. Th ese two compo­ nents appear right at the input to the ma chine mod el.  Also, like any transformer with an iron core, the nux in the ma chine is re­ lated to the integral of the applied voltage E l. TIle curve of ma gnetom otive force  versus nux (ma gnetiz
ation curve) for this ma chine is compared to a similar curve  for a power transfonner in Figure 7-8. N otice that the slope of the induction mo­ tor's ma gnetom otive force-nux curve is much shallowe r than the curve of a good  transformer. TIlis is because there mu st be an air gap in an induction motor, which  greatly increases the reluctance of the nux path and therefore reduces the coupling  between primary and secondary windings. TIle higher reluctance caused by the air  gap mean s that a 
higher ma gnetizing current is required to obtain a given nux  level. Therefore, the ma gnetizing reactance XM in the equivalent circuit will have  a mu ch smaller value (or the susceptance EM will have a much larger value) than  it would in an ordinary transformer.  The primary internal stator voltage E l is coupled to the secondary EN by an  ideal transformer with an effective turns ratio a.ff" The effective turns ratio a.ff is  fairly easy to detennine for a wound-rotor m otor- it is basicall
y the ratio of the  conductors per phase on the stator to the conductors per phase on the rotor, modi­ fied by any pitch and distribution factor differences. It is rather difficult to see a.ff  390 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  T ransformer  ""GURE 7-8  ;.Wb  Induction  motor  ~, A-turns  The magnetization curve of an induction motor compared to that of a transformer,  clearly in the cage of a case rotor m otor because there are no distinct windings on  the cage rotor. In either case, there i
s an effective turns ratio for the m otor,  1lle voltage ER produced in the rotor in turn produces a current flow in the  shorted rotor (or secondary) circuit of the ma chine,  TIle primary impedances and the ma gnetiwtion current of the induction m o­ tor are very similar to the corresponding compon ents in a transformer equivalent  circuit. An induction motor equivalent circuit differs from a transfonner equiva­ lent circuit primarily in the effects of varying rotor frequency on the rotor volt
age  ER and the rotor impedances RR and jXR'  The Rotor Circuit Model  In an induction motor, when the voltage is applied to the stator windings, a volt­ age is induced in the rotor windings of the ma chine, In general, the greater the  relative motion between the rotor and the stator magnetic fields, the greater the  resulting rotor voltage and rotor frequency, The largest relative m otion occurs  when the rotor is stationary, called the locked-rotor or blocked-rotor condition, so  the largest 
voltage and rotor frequency arc induced in the rotor at that condition,  TIle smallest voltage (0 V ) and frequency (0 H z) occur when the rotor m oves at  the same speed as the stator ma gnetic field, resulting in no relative m otion, Th e  ma gnitude and frequency of the voltage induced in the rotor at any speed between  these extremes is directly propoT1ional to the slip of the rotor, Th erefore, if the  ma gnitude of the induced rotor voltage at locked-rotor conditions is called EIlQ, the  m
a gnitude of the induced voltage at any slip will be given by the equation  (7-10)  INDU CT ION MOTORS 391  +  R,  FlGU RE 7-9  Th e rotor ci['(;uit model of an induction motor.  and the frequency of the induced voltage at any slip will be given by the equation  (7-8)  This voltage is induced in a rotor containing both resistance and reactance.  Th e rotor resistance RR is a constant (except for the skin effect), independent of  slip, while the rotor reactance is affected in a m ore complicated 
way by slip.  Th e reactance of an induction motor rotor depends on the inductance of the  rotor and the frequency of the voltage and current in the rotor. With a rotor induc­ tance of LR , the rotor reactance is given by  X R = w rLR = 27rfrLR  B y Equation (7--8),/, = sf~, so  X R - 27rSfeLR  - s(27rfeLR)  - sXRO (7-11)  w here XRO is the blocked-rotor rotor reactance.  Th e resulting rotor equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 7-9. Th e rotor cur­ rent flow can be found as  E, IR = RR + jsXR
O (7-12)  E",  IR = R I + X R S } RO  (7-13)  N otice from Equation (7-13) that it is possible to treat all of the rotor effects due  to varying rotor speed as being caused by a varying impedance supplied with  power from a constant-voltage source E RO . The equivalent rotor impedance from  this point of view is  (7-14)  and the rotor equivalent circuit using this convention is shown in Figure 7- 10. In  the equivalent circuit in Figure 7-10, the rotor voltage is a constant E IiO V and the  392 
ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  o 25  R,  ,  I'IGU R E 7-10  Th e rotor cirwit model with all the frequency  (slip) effects concentrated in resistor RR.  ~  ~  \  100  nm . percentage of synchronous speed  ""GU R E 7-11  Rotor currem as a function of rotor speed.  125  rotor impedance ZR .• q contains all the effects of varying rotor slip. A plot of the  current flow in the rotor as developed in Equations (7-12) and (7- 13) is shown in  Figure7-11.  N otice that at very low slips the resisti
ve tenn RR I s» XRQ , so the rotor re­ sistance predominates and the rotor current varies linearly with slip. At high slips,  INDUCTION MOTORS 393  XRO is much larger than RR I s, and the rotor current approaches a steady-state  value as the slip becom es very large.  The Final Equivalent Circuit  To produce the fmal per-phase equivalent circuit for an induction motor, it is nec­ essary to refer the rotor part of the model over to the stator side. 1lle rotor circuit  mod el that will be referred
 to the stator side is the mod el shown in Figure 7-10,  which has all the speed variation effects concentrated in the impedance term.  In an ordinary transformer, the voltages, currents, and impedances on the  secondary side of the device can be referred to the primary side by mean s of the  turns ratio of the transfonner:  (7-15)  Ip = I, _1: ,-a (7-16)  and (7-17)  wh ere the prime refers to the referred values of voltage, current, and impedance.  Exactly the same sort of transfonnation can b
e done for the induction mo­ tor's rotor circuit. If the effective turns ratio of an induction motor is aoff, then the  transfonned rotor voltage becomes  the rotor current becom es  and the rotor impedance becomes  Ifwe now make the following definitions:  R2 = a;ffRR  (7-18)  (7-19)  (7-20)  (7-21)  (7-22)  then the final per-phase equivalent circuit of the induction m otor is as shown in  Figure 7-12.  The rotor resistance RR and the locked-rotor rotor reactance XIIQ are very dif­ ficult or i
mpossible to determine directly on cage rotors, and the effective turns ra­ tio aoff is also difficult to obtain for cage rotors. Fortunately, though, it is possible  to mak e mea surements that will directly give the referred resistance and reac­ tance R l and X l, even though RR , XRO and aeff are not known separately. Th e mea­ surement of induction motor parameters will be taken up in Section 7.7.  394 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I, R , I,  - -+  1.1  ~  v • Rc jXM E,  -7 - ""GU R E 7
-12  The per-phase equivalent ci['(;uit of an induction motor.  Air-gap power :  , ,  :: ~~' "~oow. r  P u,,,,,f3vrhcos6 ::  ,  R,~ P trictiOll  '-L ODdwiD<!ay  ""GU R E 7-1J  p=  (Stator  copper  loss)  (C~  losses)  (Rotor 00_  loss)  The power-flow diagram of an induction motor.  7.4 POWER A ND TORQ U E IN  IND UC TION MOTOR S  B ecause induction motors are singly exciled ma chines, their power and torque re­ lationships are considerably different from the relationships in the synchronous  ma
 chines previously studied. TIlis section reviews the power and torque relation­ ships in induction motors.  L osses and the Pow er-Flow Diagram  An induction motor can be basically described as a rotating transfonner. Its input  is a three-phase system of voltages and currents. For an ordinary transfonner, the  output is electric power from the secondary windings. TIle secondary windings in  an induction m otor (the rotor) are shorted out, so no electrical output exists from  norma l induction 
motors. Instead, the output is m echanical. T he relationship be­ tween the input electric power and the output me chanical power of this m otor is  shown in the power-flow diagram in Figure 7- 13.  INDUCTION MOTORS 395  Th e input powerto an induction m otor fln is in the form of three-phase elec­ tric voltages and currents. TIle first losses encountered in the ma chine are [2R  losses in the stator windings (the stator copper loss PSCL )' Then som e amount of  power is lost as hysteresis and e
ddy currents in the stator (P.:ore). Th e power re­ maining at this point is transferred to the rotor of the ma chine across the air gap  between the stator and rotor. This power is called the air-gap power PAG of the  ma chine. After the power is transferred to the rotor, som e of it is lost as /lR losses  (the rotor copper loss PRCL ), and the res.t is converted from electrical to me chani­ cal form (P C<JII¥)' Finally, friction and windage losses PF&W and stray losses Pmlsc are  subtracted. T
he remaining power is the output of the m otor Pout.  The core losses do not always appear in the power-flow diagram at the point  show n in Figure 7- 13. Because of the nature of core losses, where they are ac­ cou nted for in the ma chine is som ew hat arbitrary. Th e core losses of an induction  motor come partially from the stator circuit and partially from the rotor circuit.  Since an induction motor nonnally ope rates at a speed near synchronous speed,  the relative m otion of the ma gneti
c fields over the rotor surface is quite slow, and  the rotor core losses are very tiny compar ed to the stator core losses. Since the  largest fraction of the core losses come s from the stator circuit, all the core losses  are lumped together at that point on the diagram. Th ese losses are represented in  the induction m otor equivalent circuit by the resistor R c (or the conductance Gd.  If core losses are just given by a number (X watts) instead of as a circuit element  they are often lumped
 together with the me chanical losses and subtracted at the  point on the diagram where the m echanical losses are located.  Th e higher the speed of an induction motor, the higher its friction, windage,  and stray losses. On the other hand, the higherthe speed of the motor (up to n,ync)'  the lower its core losses. Therefore, these three categories of losses are sometimes  lumped together and called rotational losses. The total rotational losses of a m o­ tor are often considered to be constant
 with changing speed, since the component  losses change in opposite directions with a change in speed.  Exa m ple 7-2, A 4S0-V, 60-Hz, SO-hp, three-phase induction motor is drawing  60 A at 0.S5 PF lagging. The stator copper losses are 2 kW, and the rotor copper losses are  700 W. The friction and windage losses are 600 W, the core losses are ISOO W, and the  stray losses are negligible. Find the following quantities:  (a) The air-gap power PAG  (b) The power converted P """"  (c) Theoutputpowe
rP OIIt  (d) The efficiency of the motor  Solutioll  To answer these questions, refer to the power-flow diagram for an induction motor (Fig­ ure 7- 13).  (a) The air-gap power is just the input power minus the stator j2R losses. The input  power is given by  396 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Pin = V3"VT h cos ()  = V3"(480 V)(60 A)(O.8S) = 42.4 kW  From the power-flow diagram, the air-gap power is given by  PAG = Pin - P SCL. - P.:ore  = 42.4kW - 2 kW - 1.8kW = 38.6kW  (b) From the power-fl
ow diagram, the power converted from electrical to mechan­ ical fonn is  P C<JiIV = P AG - PRCL  = 38.6 kW - 700 W = 37.9 kW  (c) From the power-flow diagram, the output power is given by  Pout = P C<JiIV - P F& W - P mi«:  = 37.9kW - 600W - OW = 37.3kW  or, in horsepower,  1 hp  Pout = (37.3 kW) 0.746 kW = SOhp  (d) Therefore, the induction motor's efficiency is  P ow er and Torque in an Induction M otor  Figure 7- 12 sho w s the per-phase equivalent circuit of an induction m otor. If the  equi
valent circuit is examin ed closely, it can be used to derive the pow er and  torque equations governing the operation of the m otor.  TIle input current to a phase of the m otor can be found by di viding the input  voltage by the total equivalent imp edance:  V. II - (7-23)  Z~  where Zeq = RI + JXI + . I  G c - )B M + V 2/S + jX2  (7-24)  Th erefore, the stator copper losses, the core losses, and the rotor copper losses can  be found. T he stator copper losses in the three phases are given by 
 (7-25)  Th e core losses are given by  (7-26)  INDUCTION MOTORS 397  so the air-gap pow er can be found as  ICp-A-G-~-R-;"---p-,c-c---P-,~-' (7-27)  Look closely at the equivalent circuit of the rotor. The only element in the  equivalent circuit where the air-gap power can be consumed is in the resistor R l/S.  Therefore, the air-gap pow er can also be given by  I PAG = 3 Ii~ 1 (7-28)  The actual resistive losses in the rotor circuit are given by the equation  PR G- = 31~ RR (7-29)  Since power
 is unchanged when referred across an ideal transfonner, the rotor  copper losses can also be expressed as  I'P-R-cc-~-31~lC-R-,'1 (7-30)  After stator copper losses, core losses, and rotor copper losses are sub­ tracted from the input power to the motor, the remaining power is converted from  electrical to m echanical form. This power converted, which is som etimes called  developed mechanical power , is given by  = 3Ii R 2 _ 312R  , "  = 31~ R2(~ - 1)  (7-3 1)  N otice from Equations (7-28) an
d (7-30) that the rotor copper losses are  equal to the air-gap pow er times the slip:  (7-32)  Therefore, the lower the slip of the motor, the low er the rotor losses in the ma­ chine. Note also that if the rotor is not turning, the slip S = 1 and the air-gap  power is entirely consumed in the rotor. This is logical, since if the rotor is not  turning, the output power Pout (= "Tload w ",) mu st be zero. Since P.:<>D¥ = PAG - PRCL ,  this also gives another relationship between the air-gap powe
r and the pow er con­ verted from electrical to m echanical fonn:  P.:onv = PAG - PR C L  (7-33)  398 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Finally, if the friction and windage losses and the stray losses are known ,  the output power can be found as  'I "pooC-, -_~~CO-",---Cp~,-&-W---CP~~-."-'1 (7-34)  TIle induced torque rind in a ma chine wa s defined as the torque generated by  the internal electric-to-rnechanical pow er conversion. T his torque differs from the  torque actually available at th
e tenninals of the motor by an am ount equal to the  friction and windage torques in the ma chine. T he induced torque is given by the  equation  (7-35)  TIlis torque is also called the developed torque of the ma chine.  TIle induced torque of an induction m otor can be expressed in a different  fonn as well. Equation (7-7) expresses actual speed in terms of synchronous  speed and slip, while Equation (7- 33) expresses P"DDY in term s of PAG and slip.  Substituting these two equations into Equat
ion (7-35) yields  (1 - s)PA G  rind = (1 s)WSytlC  (7-36)  TIle last equation is especially useful because It expresses induced torque directly  in tenns of air-gap power and synchronous speed, which does not vary. A know l­ edge of PAG thus directly yields rind.  Separating the R otor C opper L osses and  the Pow er Co nverted in an Induction  M otor's Equivalent C ircuit  Part of the power comin g across the air gap in an induction motor is consum ed in  the rotor copper losses, and part of i
t is converted to m echanical power to drive  the m otor's shaft. It is possible to separate the two uses of the air-gap power and  to indicate them separately on the m otor equivalent circuit.  Equation (7- 28) gives an expression for the total air-gap power in an in­ duction m otor, while Equation (7-30) gives the actual rotor losses in the m otor.  TIle air-gap power is the power which would be consumed in a resistor of value  R is, while the rotor copper losses are the power which would be c
onsumed in a  resistor of value R 2. TIle difference between them is P eDDY' which mu st therefore be  the power consumed in a resistor of value  Reonv = ~2 - R 2 = R2(~ - 1)  (7-37)  INDUCT ION MOTORS 399  I, R, I,  - -+  (SC L) 1.1 + (RCL )  (Core loss) R, jXM E,  J./  - FIGU RE 7-14  The per-phase equivalent circuit with rotor losses and P CO« separated.  Per-phase equivalent circuit with the rotor copper losses and the pow er con­ verted to mechani cal fonn separated into distinct elem ents 
is shown in Figure 7- 14.  Exa mpl e 7-3. A 460-V. 25-hp. 6()"'H z. four-pole. V-connected induction motor has  the following impedances in ohms per phase referred to the stator circuit:  R t = 0.641 n  XI = 1.106 n  R l = 0.332 n  X l = 0.464 n XM = 26.3 n  Th e total rotational losses are 1100 W and are assumed to be constant. The core loss is  lumped in with the rotational losses. For a rotor slip of 2.2 percent at the rated voltage and  rated frequency. find the motor's  (a) Speed  (b) Stato
r current  (c) Power factor  (d) P OO<IV and Pout  (e) Tiad and Tiood  (jJ Efficiency  Solutioll  The per-phase equivalent circuit of this motor is shown in Figure 7- 12. and the power-flow  diagram is shown in Figure 7- 13. Since the core losses are Iwnped together with the fric­ tion and windage losses and the stray losses. they will be treated like the mechanical losses  and be subtracted after P coov in the power-flow diagram.  (a) The synchronous speed is  120fe  n,yDC = - P- = 129(60 H z) 
_ 1800 r/min  4 poles  The rotor's mechanical shaft speed is  nm = (I - s)n,yDC  = (1 - 0.022XI800r /min) = 1760r/min  400 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  or w". = (1 - s)w.ry1tC  = (1 - 0.022XI88.5rad/s) = 184.4rad/s  (b) To find the stator clUTent, get the equivalent impedance of the circuit. Th e first  step is to combine the referred rotor impedance in parallel with the magnetiza­ tion branch, and then to add the stator impedance to that combination in series.  The referred rotor impedance 
is  R, z,= - +jX2 ,  = 0.332 + '0 464 0.022 J.  = 15.00 + jO.464 [! = 15.IOLI.76° [!  The combined magnetization plus rotor impedance is given by  1  Z/ = I/jXM + 1!L;  = ~=~~1=~~ jO.038 + 0.0662L 1.76°  1 = 0.0773L 31.10 = 12.94L31.IO [!  Therefore, the total impedance is  z..,. = z. ... , + Z/  = 0.641 + j1.106 + 12.94L31.1° [!  = 11.72 + j7.79 = 14.07L33.6° [!  The resulting stator current is  V I - ~ ,-z..  _ 266LO ° V _  - 14.07 L33.6° [! - (c) The power motor power factor is  PF = cos 33.6
° = 0.833  (d) The input power to this motor is  Pin = V3"VT h cos ()  18.88L - 33.6° A  lagging  = V3"(460 VX18.88 A)(0.833) = 12,530 W  The stator copper losses in this machine are  PSCL = 3/f R ]  = 3(18.88 A) 2(0.64I [!) = 685 W  The air-gap power is given by  PA G = P;n - PSCL = 12,530 W - 685 W = 11,845 W  Therefore, the power converted is  (7-25)  INDU CT ION MOTORS 401  P.:oov = (1 - S)PAG = (I - 0.022X11,845 W) = 11,585 W  The power P"", is given by  Pout = P.:oov - Prot = 11,585W - llO
OW = 1O,485W  (  1 hp ) = 10,485 W 746 W = 14.1 hp  (e) The induced torque is given by  PAG Tind = -­ w ')'''''  11,845 W  = 18S.5rad/s = 62.8 N om  and the output torque is given by  p-,  Tload =  10,485 W  = 184.4 radls = 56.9 Nom  (In English lUlits, these torques are 46.3 and 41.9 Ib-ft, respectively.)  (jJ The motor's efficiency at this operating condition is  p~  7f = R x 100% ,.  10,485 W  125 30 W x 100% = 83.7%  7.5 INDUCTION MOTOR TORQUE-SPEED  CHARACTERISTICS  H ow does the torque of 
an induction m otor change as the load changes? H ow  much torque can an induction motor supply at starting conditions? H ow mu ch  does the speed of an induction m otor drop as its shaflload increases? To find out  the answers to these and similar questions, it is necessary to clearly understand the  relationships among the motor's torque, speed, and power.  In the following material, the torque-speed relationship will be examined  first from the physical viewpoint of the motor's ma gnetic fiel
d behavior. TIlen, a  general equation for torque as a fu nction of slip wil I be derived from the induction  m otor equivalent circuit (Figure 7- 12).  Induced Torque from a Physical Standpoint  Figure 7-15a show s a cage rotor induction m otor that is initially operating at no  load and therefore very nearly at synchronous speed. llle net ma gnetic field B DeI in  this ma chine is produced by the ma gnetization current 1M flowing in the m otor's  equivalent circuit (see Figure 7-12). Th e ma g
nitude of the ma gnetization current  and hence of B DeI is directly proportional to the voltage E ). If E ] is constant, then the  402 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ER IR E, , I,  0 0 ,  0 "  0 0 ,  " ,  " 0 ' , 0 0 " 0 IB .... /  D~g.~  Rotor , ' ,  0  ,  0 0 ' e,  w , ., 0 , ,  0 , 0 , , , , , H, , 0 ,  0 , 0 , , , , , 0 0 0 ,  0 0 0  (,' (b'  ""GURE 7-15  (a) The magnetic fields in an induction motor under light loods. (b) Th e magnetic fields in an  induction motor under heavy loads.  0 
 0  0  Rotor  net ma gnetic field in the m otor is constant. In an actual ma chine, E l varies as the  load changes, because the stator impedances R l and X l cause varying voltage drops  with varying load. Howeve r, these drops in the stator wi ndi ngs are relatively small,  so E l (and hence 1M and B o..) is approximalely constanl with changes in load.  Figure 7-l5a shows the induction m otor at no load. At no load, the rotor  slip is very smaJl, and so the relalive m otion between the rotor a
nd the ma gnetic  fields is very smaJi and the rotor frequency is also very small. Since the relative  m otion is smaJl, the voltage ER induced in the bars of the rotor is very smaJl, and  the resulting currenl flow IR is small. Also, because the rotor frequency is so very  small, the reactance of the rotor is nearly zero, and the ma ximum rotor currenl IR  is almost in phase with the rotor voltage E R . TIle rotor current thus produces a  small ma gnetic field DR at an angle just slighlly great
er than 90° behind the net  ma gnetic field B oe,. N otice that the stator current mu st be quite large even at no  load, since it mu st supply m ost of B ne,. (TIlis is why induction motors have large  no-load currents compared to other types of ma chines.)  TIle induced torque, which keeps the rotor turning, is given by the equation  (4-60)  Its ma gnitude is given by  "Tind = kBRB oe, sin /j (4-61)  Since the rotor ma gnetic field is very smaJl, the induced torque is also quite  small- just l
arge enough to overcome the m otor's rotational losses.  N ow suppose the induction motor is loaded down (Figure 7-15b). As the  m otor's load increases, its slip increases, and the rotor speed falls. Since the rotor  speed is slowe r, there is now more relative motion between the rotor and the sta- INDUCTION MOTORS 403  tor ma gnetic fields in the ma chine. Greater relative motion produces a stronger ro­ tor voltage ER which in turn produces a larger rotor current IR . With a larger rotor  curr
ent, the rotor ma gnetic field DR also increases. Howeve r, the angle of the ro­ tor current and DR changes as well. Since the rotor slip is larger, the rotor fre­ quency rises (f, = st), and the rotor's reactance increases (WLR ). Th erefore, the  rotor current now lags further behind the rotor voltage, and the rotor ma gnetic  field shifts with the current. Figure 7-15b show s the induction motor operating at  a fairly high load. Notice that the rotor current has increased and that the angle 8
  has increased. The increase in BR tends to increase the torque, while the increase  in angle 8 tends to decrease the torque (TiDd is proportional to sin 8, and 8 > 90°).  Since the first effect is larger than the second one, the overall induced torque in­ creases to supply the motor's increased load.  When does an induction motor reach pullout torque? This happens when the  point is reached where, as the load on the shaft is increased, the sin 8 tenn de­ creases m ore than the BR tenn increase
s. At that point, a further increase in load  decreases "TiDd, and the m otor stops.  It is possible to use a know ledge of the ma chine's ma gnetic fields to approx­ imately derive the output torque-versus-speed characteristic of an induction motor.  Rem ember that the ma gnitude of the induced torque in the ma chine is given by  (4-61)  Each tenn in this expression can be considered separately to derive the overall  ma chine behavior. The individual tenns are  L B R . TIle rotor ma gnetic fiel
d is directly proportional to the current flowing in  the rotor, as long as the rotor is unsaturated. TIle current flow in the rotor in­ creases with increasing slip (decreasing speed) according to Equation (7-13).  This current flow was plotted in Figure 7-11 and is shown again in Fig­ ure 7-16a.  2. B"",. The net ma gnetic field in the m otor is proportional to E ] and therefore is  approximately constant (E ] actually decreases with increasing current flow,  but this effect is small compared 
to the other two, and it will be ignored in  this graphical development). TIle curve for B"", versus speed is shown in Fig­ ure 7-16b.  3. sin 8. TIle angle 8 between the net and rotor ma gnetic fields can be expressed  in a very useful way. Look at Figure 7-15b. In this figure, it is clear that the  angle 8 is just equal to the power-factor angle of the rotor plus 90°:  (7-38)  TIlerefore, sin 8 = sin (OR + 90°) = cos OR. TIlis tenn is the power factor of  the rotor. The rotor power-factor angl
e can be calculated from the equation  (7-39)  404 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  J,  oe  I DRI r---_~  ~---------7~-- '.  n,ymc ,.,  L----------c-~-_ '.  '.-,b,  0 '. ,e, '.- ,~  ,d, '.- '.  Th e resulting rotor power factor is given by  PFR = cos (JR  FlGU RE 7-16  Grapltical development of an induction  motor torque-speed cltaT3cteristic.  (a) Plot of rotor current (and titus IU RI )  versus speed for an induction motor;  (b) plot of net magnetic field versus  speed for the motor; (c) plo
t of rotor  power factor versus speed for the  motor; (d) the resulting torque-speed  characteristic.  PF = cos (tan- 1SXRQ ) , R, (7-40)  A plot of rotor power factor versus speed is shown in Figure 7-16c.  Since the induced torque is proportional to the product of these three tenns,  the torque-speed characteristic of an induction motor can be constructed from the  INDU CT ION MOTORS 405  graphical multiplication of the previous three plots (Figure 7-16a to c). 1lle  torque-speed characteristi
c of an induction motor derived in this fashion is show n  in Figure7-16d.  This characteristic curve can be di vided roughly into three regions. Th e first  region is the low-slip region of the curve. In the low-slip region, the m otor slip in­ creases approximately linearly with increased load, and the rotor me chanical  speed decreases approximately linearly with load. In this region of operation, the  rotor reactance is negligible, so the rotor power factor is approximately unity,  while the
 rotor current increases Ii nearly with slip. The entire normnl steady-state  operating range of an induction motor is included in this linear low-slip region.  Thu s in normal operation, an induction motor has a linear speed droop.  Th e second region on the induction m otor's curve can be called the  moderate-slip region. In the moderate-slip region, the rotor frequency is higher  than before, and the rotor reactance is on the same order of ma gnitude as the rotor  resistance. In this region, 
the rotor current no longer increases as rapidly as before,  and the power factor starts to drop. TIle peak torque (the pullout torque) of the  m otor occurs at the point where, for an increm ental increase in load, the increase  in the rotor current is exactly balanced by the decrease in the rotor power factor.  Th e third region on the induction m otor's curve is called the high-slip re­ gion. In the high-slip region, the induced torque actually decreases with increased  load, since the increa
se in rotor current is completely overshadowed by the de­ crease in rotor power factor.  For a typical induction motor, the pullout torque on the curve will be 200 to  250 percent of the rated full-load torque of the ma chine, and the starting torque (the  torque at zero speed) will be 150 percent or so of the full-load torque. Unlike a syn­ chronous m otor, the induction motor can start with a fuJI load attached to its shaft.  The Derivation of the Induction Motor  Induced-Torque Equation  It i
s possible to use the equivalent circuit of an induction motor and the power­ flow diagram for the m otor to derive a general expression for induced torque as a  function of speed. Th e induced torque in an induction motor is given by Equation  (7-35) or (7-36):  (7-35)  (7-36)  Th e latter equation is especially useful, since the synchronous speed is a constant  for a given frequency and number of po les. Since w 'ync is constant, a know ledge  of the air-gap power gives the induced torque of t
he m otor.  Th e air-gap power is the power crossing the gap from the stator circuit to  the rotor circuit. It is equal to the power absorbed in the resistance R 2! s. H ow can  this power be found?  406 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  v •  - I,  - ""GURE 7-17  , R , I,  - +  jXM E,  - Per-phase equivalent circuit of an induction motor.  ~  R efer to the equivalent circuit given in Figure 7-17. In this figure, the air­ gap power supplied to one phase of the mot or can be seen to be  , R,  PA
G.t4> = 12s  Th erefore, the total air-gap power is  _ 2 R 2 PAG -312 ,  If /l can be determined, then the air-gap pow er and the induced torque will be  known.  Although there are several wa ys to solve the circuit in Figure 7-17 for the cur­ rent ll, perhaps the easiest one is to detennine the lllevenin equivalent of the por­ tion of the circuit to the left of the X's in the figure. Th evenin's theorem states that  any linear circuit that can be separated by two tenninals from the rest of the 
system  can be replaced by a single voltage source in series with an equivalent impedance.  If this were done to the induction motor equivalent circuit, the resulting circuit  w ould be a simple series combination of elements as shown in Figure 7-18c.  To calculate the lllevenin equivalent of the input side of the induction motor  equivalent circuit, first open-circuit the terminals at the X's and fmd the resulting  open-circuit voltage present there. lllen, to find the Th evenin impedance, kill
  (short-circuit) the phase voltage and find the Zeq seen "looking" into the tenninals.  Figure 7-18a show s the open tenninals used to find the The venin voltage.  By the voltage divider rule,  ZM  VTH = V4> Z + Z M ,  = V jXM  4>R t + jX] + jXM  llle ma gnitude of the The venin voltage Vru is  (7-4 I a)  INDU CT ION MOTORS 407  jX, :,  v '" jX/oI V  TH R]+jX]+jX/oI •  (-t)V, jX/oI Vrn XM V TH '" V. ~R]2+(X] +X/oI)2  ('J  jX, R,  (bJ  jXrn  (oj  FIGU RE 7-18  (a) The Thevenin equivalent voltage
 of an induction ntotor input circuit. (b) The Thevenin equivalent  impedance of the input circuit. (c) The resulting simplified equivalent circuit of an induction motor.  Since the ma gnetization reactance XM » X ] and XM » R J, the ma gnitude of the  Th evenin voltage is approximately  (7-4(b)  to quite good accuracy.  Figure 7-18b shows the input circuit with the input voltage source killed.  Th e two impedances are in parallel, and the TIlevenin impedance is given by  Z IZM  ZTH = Z l + ZM (
7-42)  This impedance reduces to  408 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (7-43)  B ecause X M » X l and X M + X l »Rb the TIlevenin resistance and reactance are  approximately given by  (7-44)  (7-45)  TIle resulting equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 7-18c. From this circuit,  the current 12 is given by  V TH  12 = ZTH +2;  _ ~~~~V~TH!lL~~~  Rrn + R 2/ s + jXTH + jX2  Th e ma gnitude of this current is  VTH  /2 = Y(RTH + R 2/sP + (Xrn + X2)2  TIle air-gap power is therefore given by  R, P = 3
[2 -AG 2 S  = (Rrn + R 2/si + (Xrn + X 2)2  and the rotor-induced torque is given by  PAG  T;nd=w  ~oc  (7-46)  (7-47)  (7-48)  (7-49)  (7-50)  A plot of induction motor torque as a function of speed (and slip) is shown  in Figure 7-19, and a plot show ing speeds both above and below the normal m o­ tor range is show n in Figure 7-20.  Comments on the Induction Motor  Torque-Speed Curve  TIle induction motor torque-speed characteristic curve plotted in Figures 7-19  and 7-20 provides several imp
ortant pieces ofinfonnation about the operation of  induction motors. TIlis infonnation is summari zed as follows:  INDU CT ION MOTORS 409  Pullout torque \  400%  " ~  =  • • 300%  • Starting  • "  torque  § (  ~ 200%  " ~  100% ____________________ ~U~l~~~~~:~~  o  M echanical speed  FIGURE 7-19  A typical induction motor torque-speed characteristic curve.  I. 1lle induced torque of the m otor is. zero at synchronous speed. 1llis fact has  been discussed previously.  2. 1lle torque-speed curve
 is nearly linear between no load and full load. In this  range, the rotor resistance is mu ch larger than the rotor reactance, so the ro­ tor current, the rotor ma gnetic field, and the induced torque increase linearly  with increasing slip.  3. Th ere is a m aximum possible torque that cannot be exceeded. nlis torque,  called the pullout torque or breakdown torque, is 2 to 3 times the rated full­ load torque of the m otor. Th e next section of this chapter contains a method  for calculating pu
llout torque.  4. 1lle starting torque on the m otor is slightly larger than its full-load torque, so  this m otor will start carrying any load that it can supply at full power.  5. N otice that the torque on the m otor for a given slip varies as the square of the  applied voltage. nlis fact is useful in one fonn of induction motor speed con­ trol that will be described later.  6. If the rotor of the induction motor is driven faster than synchronous speed,  then the direction of the induced torq
ue in the ma chine reverses and the ma ­ chine becomes a generator, converting me chanical power to electric power.  1lle use of induction ma chines as generators will be described later.  410 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  400  ]  = 200  e  '0 B raking  If region  ;  §  ] -200  ~  -400  ""GURE 7-10  Tmn --........~ Pullout torque  Motor region  nsyDC..-/ Me chanical speed  Generator region  Induction motor torque-speed characteristic curve. showing the extended operating ranges (braking  regi
on and generator region).  7. If the m otor is turning backward relative to the direction of the ma gnetic fields,  the induced torque in the ma chine will stop the ma chine very rapidly and will  try to rotate it in the other direction. Since reversing the direction of ma gnetic  field rotation is simply a matter of sw itching any two stator phases, this fact  can be used as a way to very rapidly stop an induction m otor. Th e act of  sw itching two phases in order to stop the m otor very rapid
ly is called plugging.  TIle power converted to m echanical fonn in an induction motor is equal to  and is show n plotted in Figure 7-21. N otice that the peak power supplied by the  induction m otor occurs at a different speed than the maximum torque; and, of  course, no power is converted to me chanical fonn when the rotor is at zero speed.  Maximum (pullout) Torque in an Induction Motor  Since the induced torque is equal to PAG/ w 'Y"'" the maximum possible torque oc­ curs when the air-gap po
wer is maximum. Since the air-gap power is equal to the  power consumed in the resistor R2 /s, the maximum induced torque will occur  when the power consumed by that resistor is maximum.  INDUCT ION MOTORS 411  800 120  700 105  600 90  ,  500 75 •  Z  ~ ,  ~  400 60 c ,  ~ " , ,  " 300 45 0  200 30  100 15  0  0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000  M echanical speed. r/min  FIGU R E 7-21  Induced torque and power convened versus motor speed in revolutions per minute for an example  four-pole i
nduction motor.  When is the power supplied to R l/s at its maximum ? Refer to the simp lified  equivalent circuit in Figure 7- 18c. In a situation where the angle of the load im­ pedance is fixed, the maximum power transfer theorem states that maximum  power transfer to the load resistor R ll s wil I occur when the magnitude of that im­ pedance is equal to the magnitude of the source impedance. TIle equivalent source  impedance in the circuit is  Zsoun:c = RTH + jXTH + jX2  so the maximum power
 transfer occurs when  R  -i-= Y R fH + (XTH + Xii  (7-51)  (7-52)  Solving Equation (7-52) for slip, we see that the slip at pullout torque is given by  (7-53)  N otice that the referred rotor resistance R l appears only in the num erator, so the  slip of the rotor at maximum torque is directly proportional to the rotor resistance.  41 2 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  800 ,--------------------------------,  R,  I  700  600 R.  ;"" z  • ~400  "I  ~ 300  200  100  R, R,  o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ o 2
50 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000  M echanical speed. r/min  ""GU R E 7-22  The effect of varying rotor resistance on the torque-.\peed characteristic of a wound-rotor induction  motor.  TIle value of the maximum torque can be found by inserting the expression  for the slip at maximum torque into the torque equation [Equation (7-50)]. TIle re­ sulting equation for the maximum or pullo ut torque is  (7-54)  TIlis torque is proportional to the square of the supply voltage and is also in­ versely
 related to the size of the stator impedan ces and the rotor reactance. T he  smaller a ma chine's reactances, the larger the maximum torque it is capable of  achieving. N ote that slip at which the maximum torque occurs is directly propor­ tional to rotor resistance [Equation (7-53)], but the value of the maximum torque  is independent of the value of rotor resistance [Equation (7-54)].  TIle torque-speed characteristic for a wound-rotor induction motor is show n  in Figure 7-22. R ecall that i
t is possible 1.0 insert resistance into the rotor circuit  of a wound rotor because the rotor circuit is brought out to the stator through slip  rings. Notice on the figure that as the rotor resistance is increased, the pullout  speed of the motor decreases, but the ma ximum torque remains constant.  INDU CT ION MOTORS 413  It is possible to take advantage of this characteristic of wound-rotor induc­ tion m otors to start very heavy loads. If a resistance is inserted into the rotor cir­ cuit, t
he maximum torque can be adjusted to occur at starting conditions. There­ fore, the ma ximum possible torque wou ld be available to start heavy loads. On the  other hand, once the load is turning, the extra resistance can be removed from the  circuit, and the ma ximum torque will mov e up to near-synchronous speed for reg­ ular operation.  Example 7-4. A two-pole, 50-H z induction motor supplies 15 kW to a load at a  speed of 2950 r/min.  (a) What is the motor's slip?  (b) What is the induced to
rque in the motor in Nom under these conditions?  (c) What will the operating speed of the motor be if its torque is doubled?  (d) H ow mu ch power will be supplied by the motor when the torque is doubled?  Solution  (a) The synchronous speed of this motor is  = 120f,. = 120(50 Hz) = 30CXl r/min  n.yDC P 2 poles  Therefore, the motor's slip is  = 3000r/min - 29.50r/min(x 100%)  3(x)() rl mm  = 0.0167 or 1.67%  (7-4)  (b) The induced torque in the motor mu st be assruned equal to the load torque,
 and  P OO/IiV must be assumed equal to P load' since no value was given for mechanical  losses. The torque is thus  ~oov  TiDd = W- m  ~~~~~15~k~W~c.-~~-c = (2950 r/minX27Trad/rXI min/60 s)  = 48.6N o m  (c) In the low-slip region, the torque-speed curve is linear, and the induced torque  is directly proportional to slip. Therefore, if the torque doubles, then the new  slip will be 3.33 percent. The operating speed of the motor is thus  11m = (1 - s)n.yDC = (1 - 0.0333X3000r/min) = 2900 r/min  
(d) The power supplied by the motor is given by  = (97.2 N 0 m)(2900 r/minX27Trad/rXI minI 60 s)  = 29.5 kW  414 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Exa mpl e 7-5. A460-V. 25-hp. 60-H z. four-pole. Y-cOIlllected wOlUld-rotor induc­ tion motor has the following impedances in ohms per phase referred to the stator circuit:  Rl = 0.641 0  Xl = 1.106 0  R 2 = 0.3320  X 2 = 0.4640 XM = 26.3 0  (a) What is the maximrun torque of this motor? At what speed and slip does it  occur?  (b) What is the startin
g torque of this motor?  (c) When the rotor resistance is doubled. what is the speed at which the maximum  torque now occurs? What is the new starting torque of the motor?  (d) Calculate and plot the torque-speed characteristics of this motor both with the  original rotor resistance and with the rotor resistance doubled.  Solutioll  The Thevenin voltage of this motor is  (7-4la)  The Thevenin resistance is  (7-44)  J 26.3 n )' - (0.641 0-'\1.1060 + 26.3 0 = 0.590 0  The Thevenin reactance is  X 
TH - Xl = 1.106 0  (a) The slip at which maximum torque occurs is given by Equation (7-53):  R,  Smax = ~VijRijfu=cc+c=i(X~rn"=,,+=x~~' (7-53)  0.3320 = =0 .198  Y(0.590 0)1 + (1.106 0 + 0.464 0)2  This corresponds to a mechanical speed of  nm = (I - S)n,yDC = (I - 0.198)(l800r/min) = 1444r/min  The torque at this speed is  ~--,"--c-ce3,Vfl"~cc==C=~" Trrw; = 2W 'YDC[R TH + YRfu + (XTH + X ;l2]  = 3(255.2 V )2  (7-54)  2(188.5 rad/s)[O.590 0 + Y(0.590 O) l + (1.106 0 + 0.464 0)2]  = 229N om  INDU
 CT ION MOTORS 415  (b) The starting torque of this motor is found by setting s = I in Equation (7-50):  3ViHR l  T ,tan= W I(R +R)'+(X +X)'l 'YDC TH 2 rn 2  _ 3(255.2 V)1:0.3320)  - (188.5 rad/s)[(0.590 0 + 0.3320)2 + (1.I()5 0 + 0.464 0)2]  = I04N om  (c) If the rotor resistance is doubled, then the slip at maximwn torque doubles, too.  Therefore,  Smax = 0.396  and the speed at maximum torque is  nm = (I - s)n.yDC = (1 - 0.396)(1800 r/min) = 1087 r/min  The maximum torque is still  Trrw; = 22
9 Nom  The starting torque is now  _ 3(255.2 V)2(0.664 0)  Tot"" - (188.5 rad/s)[(0.590.n + 0.6640)2 + (1.106 0 + 0.4640)2]  = 170 Nom  (d) We will create a MATL A B M -file to calculate and plot the torque-speed char­ acteristic of the motor both with the original rotor resistance and with the dou­ bled rotor resistance. Th e M -file will calculate the Thevenin impedance using  the exact equations for Vlll and Zrn [Equations (7-4la) and (7-43)] instead of  the approximate equations, because the
 computer can easily perfonn the exact  calculations. It will then calculate the induced torque using Equation (7-50) and  plot the results. The resulting M -file is shown below:  % M-file, t o rque_speed_c u rve.m  % M-file c reate a p lo t o f the t o rque-speed c u rve o f the  % ind u c tio n m o t o r o f E xamp le 7 - 5.  % First , initia lize the va lues needed in this program.  rl = 0.641; % S tato r res i s tance  xl = 1.106; % S tato r r eactance  r2 = 0.332; % Roto r r esi s tance  x2
 = 0.464,  xm = 26.3,  v-ph ase = 460 / sqrt(3) ,  n_syn c = 1800,  w_sy n c = 188.5;  % Ca lc ulate the Th evenin  % 7 - 41a a n d 7 - 43.  v_th 0 v-ph ase • ( = I  % Roto r r eactance  % Magn e tizatio n bran ch r eactance  % Pha se vo ltage  % Sy n chro n ou s speed (r /min )  % Sy n chro n ou s speed (rad/s)  vo ltage and im pedance fro m Equations  sqrt (rl "2 • (xl • xm )"2 ) I ;  , "  0 ( (j*xm ) • (d • - j*xl) ) I (r1 • j * (xl • xm ) ) ,  r -"  0 real(z_ th) ,  x -"  0 im ag (z_ th) ,  
416 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ~ Now calc ulate the to rque- speed charac teris tic for man y  ~ s lips between 0 and 1. Not e that the firs t s lip value  ~ i s set t o 0.001 instead of exactly 0 to avo id d iv ide­ ~ by -zero problems.  s = (0 ,1,50) / 50;  s(l ) = 0 .00 1;  % S lip  run = (1 - s) * n_sync; % M ech a nical speed  ~ Ca lc ulate to rque fo r o riginal rotor resi s tance  fo r ii = 1,51  t_ indl (U ) = (3 * v_th" 2 * r2 / s (U )) / ...  (w_sy nc * ((r_ th + r2/s (ii)) "2 + 
(x_th + x2 ) " 2 ) ) ;  ond  ~ Ca lc ulate to rque fo r doub l ed roto r r esi s tance  fo r ii = 1,51  t_ ind2 (U ) = (3 * v_th" 2 * (2*r2 ) / s(U )) / ...  (w_sy nc " ((r_ th + (2*r2 )/s(U ))"2 + (x_th + x2 )"2 ) ) ;  ond  ~ Plo t the t o rque-speed c urve  p lo t (run,t_ indl, 'Co lo r', 'k', 'LineW idth' ,2.0);  h o ld o n;  p lo t (nm ,t_ ind2, 'Co lo r', 'k', 'LineW idth' ,2.0, 'LineStyle ', '-. ');  x labe l (' \itn_(m)' , 'Po ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ') ;  y labe l (' \tau_( ind) ' , 'Po ntwe
 ig ht', 'Bo ld ') ;  title ('Ind uc tio n m o t o r t o rque-speed c harac teris tic ', ...  'Po ntwe ight', 'Bo ld ');  legend ('O riginal R_(2)', 'Doubled R_(2} ') ;  grid o n;  h o ld o ff;  The resulting torque-speed characteristics are shown in Figure 7-23. Note that the peak  torque and starting torque values on the curves match the calculations of parts (a) through  (c). Also. note that the starting torque of the motor rose as R2 increased.  7.6 VARIATIONS IN INDUCTION MOTOR  TORQUE-SPEE
D CHARACTERISTICS  Section 7.5 contained the derivation of the torque-speed characteristic for an  induction motor. In fact, several characteristic curves were shown , depending on  the rotor resistance. Example 7-5 illustrated an induction m otor designer's  dilemma-if a rotor is designed with high resistance, then the m otor's starting  torque is quite high, but the slip is also quite high at normal operating conditions.  R ecall that P C<X1V = (I - s)p AG, so the higher the slip, the smaller 
the fraction of  air-gap power actually converted to mechanicalfonn, and thus the lowe r the m o­ tor's efficiency. A m otor with high rotor resistance has a good starting torque but  poor efficiency at nonnal operating conditions. On the other hand, a m otor with  low rotor resistance has a low starting torque and high starting current, but its ef­ ficiency at nonnal operating conditions is quite high. An induction motor designer  INDUCT ION MOTORS 41 7  2'0,--,---,--,---,--,---,--,---,--,  .- 
200  \  .- \  , I'"  • z  '0---- , , "  ." 100 r- FIGU R E 7-23  --Original R2  . - . Doubled R2  nO. rlmin  Torque-speed characteristics for the motor of Ex ample 7-5.  ,  ,  is forced to compromi se between the conflicting requirements of high starting  torque and good efficiency.  One possible solution to this difficulty was suggested in passing in Section  7.5: use a wound-rotor induction motor and insert extra resistance into the rotor  during starting. 1lle extra resistance could be comple
tely removed for better effi­ ciency during nonnal operation. Unfortunately, wound-rotor m otors are m ore ex­ pensive, need more maintenance, and require a more complex automatic control  circuit than cage rotor motors. Also, it is som etimes important to completely seal  a m otor when it is placed in a hazardous or explosive environment, and this is eas­ ier to do with a completely self-contained rotor. It would be nice to figure out  some way to add extra rotor resistance at starting and to r
emove it during normal  running without slip rings and without operator or control circuit inteTYention.  Figure 7- 24 illustrates the desired m otor characteristic. 1llis figure show s  two wound-rotor m otor characteristics, one with high resistance and one with low  resistance. At high slips, the desired m otor should behave like the high-resistance  wound-rotor m otor curve; at low slips, it should behave like the low-resistance  wound-rotor m otor curve.  Fortunately, it is possible to acco
mplish just this effect by properly taking  advantage of leakage reactance in induction motor rotor design.  Co ntrol of Motor C haracteristics  by Cag e Rotor Design  T he reactance X l in an induction motor equivalent circuit represents the referred  fonn of the rotor's leakage reactance. Re call that leakage reactance is the reac­ tance due to the rotor nux lines that do not also couple with the stator windings. In  418 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Loo"  like  h.igh.  R,  ------------ Des
ired  curve  Look s like  lowR 2  '---------------------------------'----'.  ""GURE 7-14  A torque-speed characteristic curve combining high-resistance effects at low speeds (high slip) with  low-resistance effects at high speed (low slip).  general, the farther away from the stator a rotor bar or part of a bar is, the greater  its leakage reactance, since a smaller percentage of the bar's flux will reach the sta­ tor. Th erefore, if the bars of a cage rotor are placed near the surface of the ro
tor,  they will have only a small leakage flux and the reactance Xl will be small in the  equivalent circuit. On the other hand, if the rotor bars are placed deeper into the ro­ tor surface, there will be m ore leakage and the rotor reactance X 2 will be larger.  For example, Figure 7-25a is a photograph of a rotor lamination showing  the cross section of the bars in the rotor. The rotor bars in the figure are quite large  and are placed near the surface of the rotor. Such a design will have a l
ow resis­ tance (due to its large cross section) and a low leakage reactance and X l (due to  the bar's location near the stator). Because of the low rotor resistance, the pullout  torque will be quite near synchronous speed [see Equation (7-53)], and the m otor  will be quite efficient. Rem ember that  P.,oo¥ = (I - s)PAG (7-33)  so very little of the air-gap power is lost in the rotor resistance. H ow ever, since R l  is small, the m otor's starting torque will be small, and its starting curre
nt will be  high. TIlis type of design is called the National Electrical Manuf acturers Associa­ tion (NE MA ) design class A. It is m ore or less a typical induction motor, and its  characteristics are basically the same as those of a w ound-rotor m otor with no ex­ tra resistance inserted. Its torque-speed characteristic is shown in Figure 7-26.  Figure 7-25d, how ever, show s the cross section of an induction motor rotor  with smnll bars placed near the surface of the rotor. Since the cross-s
ectional area  of the bars is small, the rotor resistance is relatively high. Since the bars are lo­ cated near the stator, the rotor leakage reactance is still small. This m otor is very  mu ch like a wound-rotor induction motor with extra resistance inserted into the  rotor. Because of the large rotor resistance, this m otor has a pullout torque occur- IN DUCT IO N MOTORS  41 9  ,,'  ,b,  'e'  ,d,  FI GU R E  7-1.5  Lamin ations from typical cage induction motor rotors. showi ng  the  cross se
ction  of  the rotor  bars :  (a)  NEMA  design class A - large bars near the surface; (b) NEMA design class B - large, deep rotor  bars; (e) NEMA design class  C--double-cage  rotor design; (d) NEMA  desisn  class  D- sm all bars  near the surface.  (Co un esy  of  Ma gneTek,  In c.)  ring  at  a  hi gh slip, and  it s starting torque is quite  hi gh. A cage motor with this  type  of rotor construc ti on is called  NE M A design class  D.  It s torque-speed character­ is ti c is also shown  in 
 Fi gure 7-26.  Deep-Bar and D ouble-Cage R otor De signs  B oth of the previous rotor designs are essentia ll y similar to a w ound-rotor motor  with a sct rotor resistance. H ow can a  variable  rotor resistance  be  produced to  combine the  hi gh starting torque and low starting current of a class 0 design with  th e low no nna l operating slip and  hi gh efficiency of a class A design?   420 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  o~~~~~~--~--~ o 20 40 60 80 100  Percentage of synchronous speed  F
IGURE 7-16  Typical torque-speed curves for different  rotor designs.  Ii is possible to produce a variable rotor resistance by the use of deep rotor  bars or double-cage rotors. TIle basic concept is illustrated with a deep-bar rotor  in Figure 7-27. Figure 7-27a shows a current flowing through the upper part ofa  deep rotor bar. Since current flow ing in that area is tightly coupled to the stator,  the leakage inductance is small for this region. Figure 7-27b show s current flow­ ing deeper in
 the bar. H ere, the leakage inductance is higher. Since all parts of the  rotor bar are in parallel electrically, the bar essentially represents a series of par­ allel electric circuits, the upper ones having a smaller inductance and the lower  ones having a larger inductance (Figure 7-27c).  At low slip, the rotor's frequency is very small, and the reactances of all the  parallel paths through the bar are small compared to their resistances. Th e imped­ ances of all parts of the bar are approx
imately equal, so current flows through all  parts of the bar equally. Th e resulting large cross-sectional area make s the rotor  resistance quite small, resulting in goOO efficiency at low slips. At high slip (start­ ing conditions), the reactances are large compared to the resistances in the rotor  bars, so all the current is forced to flow in the low-reactance part of the bar near  the stator. Since the effective cross section is lowe r, the rotor resistance is higher  than before. With a hi
gh rotor resistance at starting conditions, the starting torque  is relatively higher and the starting current is relatively lowe r than in a class A de­ sign. A typical torque-speed characteristic for this construction is the design class  B curve in Figure 7-26.  A cross-sectional view of a double-cage rotor is show n in Figure 7-25c. Ii  consists of a large, low- resistance set of bars buried deeply in the rotor and a  small, high-resistance set of bars set at the rotor surface. Ii is similar
 to the deep­ bar rotor, except that the difference between low-slip and high-slip operation is  Stator  a--:::::------ Rotor with deep bars  "j  FI GURE  7-27  Slip  ring  ,f  R  R  R  ,  'j  INDUCT ION MOTORS  421  Top  of  bar  L  L,  L,  L,  Bottom  of  bar  'bj  Slip  ring  Flux linkage  in  a deep-bar rotor. (a) For a current flowing  in  the top  of  the bar. the flux is tightly  linked  to  the stator. and leakage inductance  is  small; (b) for a current flowing  in  the bottom  of  the 
 bar. the flux is loosely linked to the stator. and leakage inductance  is  large; (c) resulting equivalent  circuit  of  the rotor  bar  as a function  of  depth  in  the rotor.  even more exaggerated.  At  starting conditions, only the small bar is effective, and  the rotor resistance is  quite  hi g h.  This  hi gh resistance results  in  a large starting  torque. H oweve r,  at  normal operating speeds, both bars are effective, and the re­ sistance is almost as low as  in  a deep-bar rotor. 
D o ubl e-cage rotors of this so rt  are  used to produce NEMA class 8 and class C characteris ti cs. Poss ibl e torque-speed  characte ri s ti cs for a rotor  of  this design are designated design class  8  and design  class  C  in  Fi gure  7-26.  D ouble-cage rotors have the disadvantage that they are m ore expensive than  the other types  of  cage rotors,  but  th ey are cheaper than wound-rotor designs.  TIl ey  allow som e of the best features possible with wound-rotor motors (high startin
g  torque with a low starting current and  go<Xl  e ffi ciency  at  nonnal operating condi­ tions)  at  a lower cost and without the need  of  maintaining slip rings and brushes.  Indu c ti on  M otor  D esign  C l asses  It  is possible to produce a large variety oftorque-speed curves  by  varying the ro­ tor characte ri s ti cs of induc ti on  mot ors. To help industry select appropriate motors  for varying applications  in  the integral-horsepowe r range, NEMA in the United   422 ELECTRIC MAC
HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  States and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in Europe have  defined a series of standard designs with different torque-speed curves. TIlese  standard designs are referred to as design classes, and an individual m otor may be  referred to as a design class X m otor. It is these NEMA and IEC design classes  that were referred to earlier. Figure 7-26 shows typical torque-speed curves for  the four standard NEMA design classes. The characteristic features of e
ach stan­ dard design class are given below.  DESIGN CLASS A. De sign class A motors are the standard motor design, with a  normal starting torque, a nonnal starting current, and low slip. TIle full-load slip  of design A motors mu st be less than 5 percent and mu st be less than that of a de­ sign B motor of equivalent rating. TIle pullout torque is 200 to 300 percent of the  full-load torque and occurs at a low slip (less than 20 percent). TIle starting torque  of this design is at least the r
ated torque for larger motors and is 200 percent or  more of the rated torque for smaller motors. TIle principal problem with this de­ sign class is its extremely high inrush current on starting. Current flows at starting  are typically 500 to 800 percent of the rated current. In sizes above about 7.5 hp,  some form of reduced-voltage starting mu st be used with these m otors to prevent  voltage dip problems on starting in the power system they are connected to. In the  past, design class A m ot
ors were the standard design for m ost applications below  7.5 hp and above about 200 hp, but they have largely been replaced by design  class 8 m otors in recent years. Typical applications for these m otors are driving  fans, blowers, pumps, lathes, and other ma chine tools.  DES IGN CLASS B. De sign class 8 m otors have a nonnal starting torque, a lowe r  starting current, and low slip. TIlis motor produces about the sam e starting torque as  the class A m otor with about 25 percent less curr
ent. TIle pullout torque is greater  than or equal to 200 percent of the rated load torque, but less than that of the class A  design because of the increased rotor reactance. Rotor slip is still relatively low (less  than 5 percent) at full load. Applications are similar to those for design A, but design  B is preferred because of its lowe r starting-current requirements. De sign class 8  m otors have largely replaced design class A motors in new installations.  DES IGN CLASS C . De sign class 
C motors have a high starting torque with low  starting currents and low slip (less than 5 percent) at full load. TIle pullout torque  is slightly lowe r than that for class A m otors, while the starting torque is up to 250  percent of the full-load torque. TIlese m otors are built from double-cage rotors, so  they are more expensive than motors in the previous classes. They are used for  high-starting-torque loads, such as loaded pumps, compressors, and conveyors.  DES IGN CLASS D. Design class
 D m otors have a very high starting torque (275  percent or more of the rated torque) and a low starting current, but they also have  a high slip at full load. TIley are essentially ordinary class A induction m otors, but  with the rotor bars mad e smaller and with a higher-resistance material. Th e high  rotor resistance shifts the peak torque to a very low speed. It is even possible for  INDU CT ION MOTORS 423  FIGURE 7-18  Rotor cross section. showing the construction of the former design cl
ass F induction motor. Since the  rotor bars are deeply buried. they have a very high leakage reactance. The high leakage reactance  reduces the starting torque and current of this mo tor. so it is called a soft-start design. (Courtesy of  Ma gneTek, Inc.)  the highest torque to occur at zero speed (100 percent slip). Full-load slip for these  motors is quite high because of the high rotor resistance. It is typically7 to II per­ cent. but ma y go as high as 17 percent or more. Th ese m otors are
 used in applica­ tions requiring the acceleration of extremely high-inertia-type loads, especially  large flywheels used in punch presses or shears. In such applications, these m otors  gradually accelerate a large flyw heel up to full speed, which then drives the  punch. After a punching operation, the motor then reaccelerates the flywheel over  a fairly long time for the next operation.  In addition to these four design classes, NEMA used to recognize design  classes E and F, which were calle
d soft-start induction motors (see Figure 7-28).  Th ese designs were distinguished by having very low starting currents and were  used for low-starling-torque loads in situations where starting currents were a  problem. 1l1ese designs are now obsolete.  424 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Exa mpl e 7-6. A460-V. 30-hp. 60-H z. four-pole. V-connected induction motor has  two possible rotor designs. a single-cage rotor and a double-cage rotor. (The stator is iden­ tical for either rotor design.
) The motor with the single-cage rotor may be modeled by the  following impedances in ohms per phase referred to the stator circuit:  R l = 0.641 0  Xl = 0.750 0  Rl = 0.3000  X l = 0.5000 XM = 26.3 0  The motor with the double-cage rotor may be modeled as a tightly coupled. high­ resistance outer cage in parallel with a loosely coupled. low-resistance inner cage (similar  to the structure of Figure 7-25c). The stator and magnetization resistance and reactances  will be identical with those in t
he single-cage design.  The resistance and reactance of the rotor outer cage are:  R u, = 3.200 0 Xu, = 0.500 0  Note that the resistance is high because the outer bar has a small cross section. while the re­ actance is the same as the reactance of the single-cage rotor. since the outer cage is very  close to the stator. and the leakage reactance is small.  The resistance and reactance of the inner cage are  R u = 0.400 0 Xu = 3.300 0  H ere the resistance is low because the bars have a large cr
oss-sectional area. but the leak­ age reactance is quite high.  Calculate the torque-speed characteristics associated with the two rotor designs.  H ow do they compare?  Solutio"  The torque-speed characteristic of the motor with the single-cage rotor can be calculated  in exactly the same manner as Example 7-5. The torque-speed characteristic of the motor  with the double-cage rotor can also be calculated in the same fashion. except that at each  slip the rotor resistance and reactance will be 
the parallel combination of the impedances  of the iIiller and outer cages. At low slips. the rotor reactance will be relatively lUlimportant.  and the large inner cage will playa major part in the machine's operation. At high slips. the  high reactance of the inner cage almost removes it from the circuit.  A MA TL A B M-ftle to calculate and plot the two torque-speed characteristics is  shown below:  ~ M -file: t o rque_speed_2. m  ~ M -file c reate and p lo t of the torque- speed  ~ indu c t i
o n m o t o r w ith a doub l e - cage rotor  curve o f an  design.  ~ Fir st , initia lize  rl = 0.641;  "  0 0.750;  e' 0 0.300;  e2i 0 0.400;  e'o 0 3.200;  "  0 0.500;  the va lu es n eeded in thi s program.  % S tato r r esi s tance  • S tato r r eactance  • Rotor r esi s tance foe s ing l e - • cage motor  • Rotor r esi s tance foe inner  • cage of doub l e - cage m o t o r  • Rotor r esi s tance foe outer  • cage of doub l e - cage m o t o r  • Rotor r eactance foe s ing l e - • cage motor
  x2 i = 3.300;  x20 = 0.500;  xm = 26.3;  v-ph ase = 460 / sqrt(3) ;  n_syn c = 1 800;  w_sy n c = 1 88.5;  % Ca lc ula t e the Th evenin  % 7 - 4 1a a n d 7 - 43.  v_th 0 v-ph ase • ( = I  INDU CT IO N M O TO RS 425  ~ Ro t o r r eact a n ce fo r inne r  ~ c age o f do u b le -cage m o to r  ~ Ro t o r r eact a n ce fo r o ute r  ~ c age o f do u b le -cage m o to r  ~ M agn e tizatio n b r a n c h r eacta n ce  ~ Ph ase vo ltage  ~ Sy n c hro n o u s speed (r /min )  % Sy n c hro n o u s spee
d (r ad/s)  vo ltage a n d im peda n ce fro m Eq u a tio n s  sqrt (rl "2 • (x l • xm ) "2 ) I ;  , "  0 ( (j*xm ) • (d • - j*x l ) ) I (r1 • j * (x l • xm ) ) ;  r -"  0 r eal (z_ th) ;  x -"  0 im ag (z_ th) ;  % N ow calc ula t e the m o t o r speed f o r m a ny s lips betwee n  % 0 a n d 1. N o t e tha t the first s lip va lue i s set t o  % 0.001 inst ead o f exactly 0 t o avo id d iv ide -by - zero  % p r ob lem s.  % S lip s = (0,1 ,50) / 50;  s(l ) = 0.001 ; % Avo id d iv i s i o n-by - 
zer o  run = (1 - s) * n_syn c; % M ech a nical speed  % Ca lc ula t e t o r q u e fo r the s ing le -cage r o t o r .  f o r ii = 1 ,51  t_ ind l (ii) = (3 * v_th" 2 * r 2 / s(ii)) / ...  (w_sy n c * ((r_ th + r 2 /s(ii))"2 + (x_ th + x2 )"2 ) );  e o d  % Ca lc ula t e r esi st a n ce a n d r eact a n ce o f the do u b le - cage  % r o t o r a t this s lip, a n d the n u se those va lues t o  % calc ula t e the ind u ced t o r q ue.  f o r ii = 1 :51  L r 0 1 / (r 2 i • j*s (ii)*x2 i ) • 1 / (
r 20 • j*s (ii)*x2o );  , -r 0 l /y_r ; • Effective r o t o r im peda n ce  r 2e ff 0 r eal (z_ r ) ; • Effective r o t o r r esi s ta n ce  x2e ff 0 im ag (z_ r ) ; • Effective r o t o r r eacta n ce  ~ Ca lc ula t e ind u ced t o r q u e fo r do u b le -cage r o t o r .  t_ ind2 (ii) = (3 * v_th" 2 * r 2e ff / s(ii)) / ...  (w_sy n c * ((r_ th + r 2e f f/s(ii))"2 + (x_ th + x2e ff)"2 ) );  e o d  % Plo t the t o r q u e - speed c u rves  p lo t (run, t_ ind l , 'Co l o r' , 'k' , 'LineW i d th
' ,2.0) ;  h o ld o n ;  p lo t (run, t_ ind2, 'Co l o r' , 'k' , 'LineW i d th' ,2.0, 'LineS ty le ' , '-.') ;  x labe l (' \itn_ (m } ', 'Fo ntwe ig ht' , 'Bo ld ') ;  y labe l ('\t au _ (ind} ', 'Fo ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  title ('Ind u c tio n m o t o r t o r q u e - spe ed ch a r act e ristics',  'Po ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  legen d ('S ing l e -C age D esig n', 'Do u b l e -C age D esig n');  g rid o n ;  h o ld o ff;  426 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  300  250 ~> . -. ,  200  E  • Z 1
50 ]  ./"  ~  /  ;? 1  -100  50 Single-cage design  .-. Double-cage design  o o 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800  n",. rlmin  ""GURE 7-29  Comparison of torque-speed characteristics for the single-and double-cage rotors of Ex amp le 7-6.  The resulting torque-speed characteristics are shown in Figure 7-29. Note Ihal the double­ cage design has a slightly higher slip in the normal operating range, a smaller maximum  torque and a higher starting torque compared to Ihe corresponding single-
cage rotor design.  This behavior matches our theoretical discussions in this section.  7.7 TRENDS IN INDU CTION  MOTOR DESIGN  TIle fundamental ideas behind the induction motor w ere developed during the late  1880s by Nicola Tesla, who received a patent on his ideas in 1888. At that time,  he presented a paper before the American lnstitute of Electrical En gineers [AlEE ,  predecessor of today's Institute of Electrical and Electronics En gineers (IEEE)] in  whi ch he described the basic princi
ples of the wound-rotor induction m otor, along  with ideas for two other imp ortant ac m otors-the synchronous m otor and the re­ luctance m otor.  Although the basic idea of the induction m otor wa s described in 1888, the  mot or itself did not spring forth in full-fledged fonn. There wa s an initial period  of rapid development, followed by a series of slow , evolutionary improvem ents  whi ch have continued to this day.  TIle induction motor assumed recog nizable modem form between 1888 and
  1895. During that period, two- and three-phase pow er sources w ere developed to  produce the rotating ma gnetic fields within the mot or, distributed stator windings  w ere developed, and the cage rotor wa s introduced. B y 1896, fully functional and  recognizable three-phase induction m otors w ere commer cially available.  B etween then and the early 1970s, there wa s continual improvem ent in the  quality of the steels, the casting techniques, the insulation, and the construction  INDU CT 
ION MOTORS  427  1903  1910  1920  ,  19 40  19!54  1974  FIGURE 7-30  Th e evolution  of  the induction motor. Th e motors shown  in  this figure are all rated at 220 V and  15  hp. There has been a dramatic decrease  in  motor size and material requirements  in  induction motors  since the first practical  ones  were produced  in  the  1890s.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  FIGURE 7-31  Typical early large induction motors.  Th e motors shown were rated at 2(xx) hp.  (Courtesy  ofGen
eml  Electric Company.)  features used  in  induc ti on motors. 1l1ese trends resulted in a smaller motor for a  given power output, yielding  co nsiderable sav in gs  in  cons tru c ti on costs.  In  fa c t,  a  mod e rn  100-hp m otor is the sa me  physical size as a 7.S-hp motor  of  1897. This  progression is vividly illustrated  by  th e I S- hp  induction m otors shown  in  Fi g ure  7-30. (See also  Fi g ur e 7-3 1. )   428 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  H owever, these improvem ents in
 induction motor design did not necessar­ ily lead to improvements in m otor operating efficiency. Th e major design effort  was directed towa rd reducing the initial materials cost of the ma chines, not towa rd  increasing their efficiency. Th e design effort was oriented in that direction because  electricity was so inexpensive, making the up-front cost of a motor the principal  criterion used by purchasers in its selection.  Since the price of oil began its spectacular climb in 1973, the life
time oper­ ating cost of ma chines has become more and m ore important, and the initial in­ stallation cost has become relatively less important. A s a result of these trends,  new empha sis has been placed on motor efficiency both by designers and by end  users of the ma chines.  N ew lines of high-efficiency induction m otors are now being produced by  all major manufacturers, and they are fanning an ever-increasing share of the in­ duction m otor market. Several techniques are used to improve
 the efficiency of  these motors compared to the traditional standard-efficiency designs. Among  these techniques are  I. M ore copper is used in the stator windings to reduce copper losses.  2. Th e rotor and stator core length is increased to reduce the ma gnetic nux den­ sity in the air gap of the ma chine. This reduces the ma gnetic saturation of the  ma chine, decreasing core losses.  3. M ore steel is used in the stator of the ma chine, al low ing a greater amount of  heat transfer out of 
the m otor and reducing its operating temperature. Th e ro­ tor's fan is then redesigned to reduce windage losses.  4. Th e steel used in the stator is a special high-grade electrical steel with low  hysteresis losses.  5. Th e steel is mad e of an especially thin gauge (i.e., the laminations are very  close together), and the steel has a very high internal resistivity. B oth effects  tend to reduce the eddy current losses in the m otor.  6. Th e rotor is carefully ma chined to produce a unifonn
 air gap, reducing the  stray load losses in the m otor.  In addition to the general techniques described above, each manufacturer  has his own unique approaches to improving m otor efficiency. A typical high­ efficiency induction motor is show n in Figure 7-32.  To aid in the comparison of motor efficiencies, NEMA has adopted a stan­ dard technique for measuring m otor efficiency based on M ethod 8 of the IEEE  Standard 11 2, Test Procedure for Polyphase Induction M otors and Generators.  NEMA 
has also introduced a rating called NEMA nominal efficiency, which ap­ pears on the nam eplates of design class A, 8 , and C m otors. Th e nominal effi­ ciency identifies the average efficiency of a large numb er of motors of a given  mod el, and it also guarantees a certain minimum efficiency for that type of m otor.  Th e standard NEMA nominal efficiencies are shown in Figure 7-33.  I NDUCT I ON  MOTORS  429  FI GU R E 7-32  A General Electric Ene rgy Saver motor. typical of modem high-efficie
ncy induction motors.  (Co urtesy  ofGeneml  Electri c Company.)  No min al G u an m h. 't!d  minim um  No min al  Guara nte  ...  >d  minimum  efficien cy,  o/~  efficiency,  %  efficiency,  %  efficiency,  '7~  95.0 94.1  SO.O  77.0  94.5 93.6 78.5 75.5  94.1 93.0 77.0 74.0  93.6 92.4 75.5 72.0  93.0 91.7 74.0 70.0  92.4 91.0 72.0 68.0  91.7 90.2 70.0 66.0  91.0 89.5 68.0 64.0  90.2 88.5 66.0 62.0  89.5 87.5 64.0 59.5  88.5 86.5 62.0 57.5  87.5 85.5 59.5 55.0  86.5 84.0 57.5 52.5  85.5 82.5 55
.0  50.'  84.0 81.5 52.5 48.0  82.5 80.0  50.'  46.0  81.5 78.5  FI GU R E 7-33  Table  of NEMA  nominal efficiency standards.  The  nominal efficiency represents the mean efficiency  of  a large number  of  sample motors. and the 8uar:mteed minimum efficiency represents the lowest  permissible efficiency for  any  given motor  of  the class.  (Reproduced  by  permission  from  Mo tors and  GenemfOrs, NEMA P ublication  MG-I . copyright 1987  by  NEMA.)   430 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Oth
er standards organizations have also established efficiency standards for  induction motors, the m ost important of which are the 8ritish (8S-269), IEC (IEC  34-2), and Japanese (JEC -37) standards. H oweve r, the techniques prescribed for  m easuring induction motor efficiency are different in each standard and yield dif­ ferent results for the same physical machine. If two m otors are each rated at 82.5  percent efficiency, but they are mea sured according to different standards, then  they ma
y not be equally efficient. When two m otors are compar ed, it is important  to compar e efficiencies mea sured under the sam e standard.  7.8 STARTING INDUCTION MOTORS  Induction m otors do not present the types of starting problems that synchronous  motors do. In man y cases, induction m otors can be started by simply connecting  them to the power line. H oweve r, there are sometimes good reasons for not doing  this. For example, the starting current required may cause such a dip in the power 
 system voltage that across-the-line staning is not acceptable.  For wound-rotor induction motors, starting can be achieved at relatively low  currents by inserting extra resistance in the rotor circuit during starting. lllis extra  resistance not only increases the starting torque but also reduces the starting current.  For cage induction motors, the starting current can vary widely depending  primarily on the m otor's rated power and on the effecti ve rotor resistance at start­ ing conditions.
 To estimate the rotor current at starting conditions, all cage m otors  now have a starting code letter (not to be confused with their design class letter)  on their nameplates. Th e code letter sets limits on the amo unt of current the m o­ tor can draw at starting conditions.  1l1ese limits are expressed in tenns of the starting apparent power of the  motor as a function of its horsepower rating. Figure 7-34 is a table containing the  starting kilovoltamperes per horsepow er for each code let
ter.  To determine the starting current for an induction m otor, read the rated volt­ age, horsepowe r, and code letter from its nameplate. 1l1en the starting apparent  power for the m otor will be  S.1Mt = (rated horsepowe r)(code letter factor)  and the starting current can be found from the equation  S.tan  IL = V3V  T  (7-55)  (7-56)  Example 7-7. What is the starting ClUTent of a 15-hp, 208-V, code-Ietter-F, three­ phase induction motor?  Solutio"  According to Figure 7-34, the maximwn kilo
voltamperes per horsepower is 5.6. Therefore,  the maximum starting kilovoltamperes of this motor is  S,w<. = (15 hp)(5.6) = 84 kVA  INDU CT ION MOTORS 431  Nomina l code L ock ... >d rotor, Nominal code Locked rotor,  letter kYAJhp letter kVAJhp  A 0--3.15 L 9.00-10.00  B 3.15--3.55 M 10.00-11.00  C 3.55-4.00 N 11.20-12.50  D 4.00-4.50 P 12.50-14.00  E 4.50-5.00 R 14.00-16.00  F 5.00-5.60 S 16.00-18.00  G 5.60--6.30 T 18.00-20.00  H 6.30--7.10 U 20.00-22.40  J 7.7- 8.00 V 22.40 and up  K 8.00-9
.00  F IGU RE 7-34  Table ofNEMA code letters. indicating the starting kilovolt amperes per horsepower of rating for a  motor. E ach code letter extends up to. but does not include. the lower bound of the next higher class.  (Reproduced 17y permission from Motors and Generators. NEMA Publication MG-I. copyright 1987  byNEMA.)  The starting current is thus  (7- 56)  84kVA  = vi3"(208 V) = 233 A  If necessary, the starting current of an induction m otor ma y be reduced by a  starting circuit. H ow
ever, if this is done, it will also reduce the starting torque of  the m otor.  One way to reduce the starting current is to insert extra inductors or resis­ tors into the power line during starting. While fonnerly comm on, this approach is  rare today. An alternative approach is to reduce the m otor's terminal voltage dur­ ing starting by using autotransformers to step it down. Figure 7-35 shows a typi­ cal reduced-voltage starting circuit using autotransfonners. During starting, con­ tacts 1 a
nd 3 are shut, supplying a lower voltage to the m otor. Once the m otor is  nearly up to speed, those contacts are opened and contacts 2 are shut. The se con­ tacts put fuJI line voltage across the m otor.  It is important to realize that while the starting current is reduced in direct  proportion to the decrease in terminal voltage, the starting torque decreases as the  square of the applied voltage. Th erefore, only a certain amount of current reduc­ tion can be done if the m otor is to start 
with a shaft load attached.  432 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Line terminals  2 2  " " " " 3 3  Motor terminals  Starting sequence:  (a) Close I and 3  (b) Open I and 3  (c) Close 2  ""GU R E 7-35  An autotransfonner starter for an induction motor.  ~ ---11  F,  M'I II  ~  F, M,  ~  F, M,  Disronnect  switch  Start  Overload  heaters  Induction  motor  Stop O L  LL---r ---"--;~M  ""GU R E 7-36  A typical across-too-line starter for an induction motor.  Induction M otor Starting Circuits  A
 typical full-voltage or across-the-Iine ma gnetic induction motor starter circuit is  show n in Figure 7-36, and the m eanings of the symbols used in the figure are ex­ plained in Figure 7-37. This operation of this circuit is very simple. Wh en the  start button is pressed, the relay (or contactor) coil M is energized, causing the  normally open contacts M t, M 2, and M ) to shut. Wh en these contacts shut, power  is applied to the induction m otor, and the m otor starts. Contact M4 also shuts
,  ---11 If- 0  e  0  II  )(  rx,  O L  )f  FIGU R E 7-37  Norm ally open  Norm ally shut  INDUCT ION MOTORS 433  Disconnect switch  Push button; push to close  Push button; push to open  R elay coil; contacts change state  when the coil energizes  Contact open when coil deenergized  Contact shut when coil deenergized  Overload heater  Overload contact; opens when the heater  gets too wann  Ty pical components found in induction motor control circuits.  which shorts out the starting sw itch, all
owing the operator to release it without re­ m oving power from the M relay. When the stop button is pressed, the M relay is  deenergized, and the M contacts open, stopping the m otor.  A ma gnetic m otor starter circuit of this sort has several bui It-in protective  features:  I. Short-circuit protection  2. Over load protection  3. Und ervoltage protection  Short-circuit protection for the molor is provided by fuses F t, F2, and Fl. If  a sudden short circuit develops within the m otor and cau
ses a current flow man y  limes larger than the rated current, these fuses will blow, disconnecting the m otor  from the power supply and preventing it from burning up. H oweve r, these fuses  mu st not burn up during normal m olor starting, so they are designed to require  currents many times greater than the full-load current before they open the circuit.  T his mean s that short circuits through a high resistance and/or excessive m otor  loads will not be cleared by the fuses.  O verload prot
ection for the m otor is provided by the devices labeled O L in  the figure. The se overload protection devices consist of two parts, an overload  434 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  heater element and overload contacts. Under nonnal conditions, the overload con­ tacts are shut. H oweve r, when the temperature of the heater elem ents rises far  enough, the OL contacts open, deenergizing the M relay, which in turn opens the  normally open M contacts and removes power from the motor.  Wh en an in
duction motor is overloaded, it is eventually drunaged by the ex­ cessive heating caused by its high currents. H oweve r, this damage takes time, and  an induction m otor will not nonnally be hurt by brief periods of high currents  (such as starting currents). Only if the high current is sustained will damage occur.  Th e overload heater elements also depend on heat for their operation, so they will  not be affected by brief perioos of high current during starting, and yet they wil I  operate du
ring long periods of high current, rem oving power from the motor be­ fore it can be damaged.  Undefi!oltage protection is provided by the controller as well. N otice from  the figure that the control power for the M relay come s from directly across the  lines to the m otor. If the voltage applied to the m otor falls too mu ch, the voltage  applied to the M relay will also fall and the relay will deenergize. TIle M co ntacts  then open, rem oving power from the m otor tenninals.  An induction m
otor starting circuit with resistors to reduce the starting cur­ rent flow is show n in Figure 7-38. TIlis circuit is similar to the previous one, ex­ cept that there are additional compon ents present to control rem oval of the start­ ing resistor. Relays lID, 2TD , and 3TD in Figure 7-38 are so-called time-delay  relays, m eaning that when they are energized there is a set time delay before their  contacts shut.  When the start button is pushed in this circuit, the M relay energizes and  power
 is applied to the m otor as before. Since the 1 ID, 2TD, and 3ID contacts  are all open, the full starting resistor is in series with the motor, reducing the start­ ing current.  When the M contacts close, notice that the 1 ID relay is energized. H ow­ ever, there is a finite delay before the lTD contacts close. During that time, the  motor partially speeds up, and the starting current drops off som e. After that time,  the 1 TO contacts close, cutting out part of the starting resistance and si
multane­ ously energizing the 2TD relay. After another delay, the 2TD contacts shut, cut­ ting out the second part of the resistor and energizing the 3TD relay. Finally, the  3TD contacts close, and the entire starting resistor is out of the circuit.  By a judicious choice of resistor val ues and time delays, this starting circuit  can be used to prevent the motor starting current from becoming dangerously  large, while still allow ing enough current flow to ensure prompt acceleration to  normal
 operating speeds.  7.9 SPEED CONTROL OF  INDUCTION MOTORS  Until the advent of modern solid-state drives, induction m otors in general were  not good ma chines for applications requiring considerable speed control. Th e  normal operating range of a typical induction motor (design classes A, B , and C)  INDU CT ION MOTORS 435  Overload  F M ] heaters  / ~I r~~~~ ------ l..L....l..I- 1 r--- Re sis]or  3TD  Re sis]or  lTD 2TD 3TD  Re sistor  lTD 2TD 3TD  S<w  Stop I OL  lID  lID 2ID  2ID 3ID  FIGU
RE 7-38  A three-step resistive staner for an induction motor.  Induction  motor  is confined to less than 5 percent slip, and the speed variation over that range is  m ore or less directly proportional to the load on the shaft of the motor. Even if the  slip could be mad e larger, the efficiency of the m otor wou ld become very poor,  since the rotor copper losses are directly proportional to the slip on the m otor  (rem ember that PRCL = sPAG ).  Th ere are really only two techniques by which 
the speed of an induction  m otor can be controlled. One is to vary the synchronous speed, which is the speed  of the stator and rotor ma gnetic fields, since the rotor speed always remains near  n,ync. Th e other technique is to vary the slip of the motor for a given load. E:1.ch of  these approaches will be taken up in more detail.  Th e synchronous speed of an induction motor is given by  436 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  120fe  p (7- 1)  so the only ways in which the synchronous speed o
f the ma chine can be varied are  (I) by changing the electrical frequency and (2) by changing the number of poles  on the ma chine. Slip control may be accomp lished by varying either the rotor re­ sistance or the terminal voltage of the m otor.  Induction M otor Speed Co ntrol by P ole C hanging  TIlere are two major approaches to changing the number of poles in an induction  motor:  I. T he method of consequent poles  2. Multiple stator windings  TIle method of consequent poles is quite an ol
d m ethod for speed control,  having been originally developed in 1897. It relies on the fact that the number of  poles in the stator windings of an induction motor can easily be changed by a fac­ tor of 2: I with only simp le changes in coil connections. Figure 7-39 shows a  ,  Winding  connections  at back end  of stator  b  fo'IGU R E 7-39  \  d,  --- b',  p~= 60°  0,  ,  " " , ,  / ' , b',  " " ,  ---" b  " ---- ,  " /' a,  A two-pole stator winding for pole changing. Notice the very small r
otor pitch of these windings.  INDUCT ION MOTORS 437  simple two-pole induction m otor stator suitable for pole changing. Notice that the  individual coils are of very short pitch (60 to 90°). Figure 7-40 show s phase a of  these windings separately for more clarity of detail.  Figure 7-40a show s the current n ow in phase a of the stator windings at an  instant of time during nonnal operation. N ote that the ma gnetic field leaves the sta­ tor in the upper phase group (a north pole) and enters 
the stator in the lower phase  group (a south pole). This winding is thus pnxlucing two stator ma gnetic poles.  a',  I(t) I  ,,'  ) NtS ) N tS  a] d] a2 d 2 S  B  - ,b,  FIGURE 7-40  Connections  at far end  of stator  ,­ " ,  ,  " "  ,­ " ,  ",  ,  " "  " B \'  B /,  "  " B \'  N a',  B  S  B  A close-up view of one phase of a pole-changing winding. (a) In the two-pole configuration. one coil  is a north pole and the other one is a south pole. (b) When the connection on one of the two coils is
  reversed. they are both nonh poles. and the magnetic flux returns to the stator at points halfway  between the two coils. The south poles are called consequent poles. and the winding is now a four­ pole winding.  438 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  N ow suppose that the direction of current flow in the lower phase group on  the stator is reversed (Figure 7--40b).1llen the ma gnetic field will leave the stator  in both the upper phase group and the lowe r phase group-each one will be a north  
ma gnetic pole. Th e ma gnetic fl ux in this ma chine mu st return to the stator between  the two phase groups, producing a pair of consequent south ma gnetic poles. Notice  that now the stator has four ma gnetic poles-twice as many as before.  1lle rotor in such a m otor is of the cage design, since a cage rotor always  has as man y poles induced in it as there are in the stator and can thus adapt when  the number of stator poles changes.  When the m otor is reconnected from two-pole to four-po
le operation, the  resulting ma ximum torque of the induction m otor can be the sam e as before  (constant-torque connection), half of its previous value (square-law-torque con­ nection, used for fans, etc.), or twice its previous value (constant-output-power  connection), depending on how the stator windings are rearranged. Figure 7--41  shows the possible stator connections and their effect on the torque-speed curve.  1lle major disadvantage of the consequent-pole m ethod of changing speed  is
 that the speeds must be in a ratio of 2: I. 1lle traditional approach to overcom­ ing this limitation was to employ multiple stator windings with different numbers  of poles and to energize only one set at a time. For examp le, a m otor might be  wound with a four-pole and a six-pole set of stator windings, and its synchronous  speed on a 6O- H z system could be sw itched from 1800 to 1200 r/min simply by  supplying power to the other set of windings. Unfortunately, multiple stator wind­ ings i
ncrease the expense of the m otor and are therefore used only when ab­ solutely necessary.  By combining the m ethod of consequent poles with multiple stator wind­ ings, it is possible to build a four-speed induction m otor. For example, with sepa­ rate four-and six-pole windings, it is possible to produce a 6O- H z m otor capable  of running at 600, 900, 1200, and 1800 r/min.  Speed Control by Changing the Line Frequency  I f the electrical frequency applied to the stator of an induction m otor
 is changed,  the rate of rotation of its ma gnetic fields "')'DC will change in direct proportion to  the change in electrical frequency, and the no-load point on the torque-speed  characteristic curve will change with it (see Figure 7--42). The synchronous speed  of the motor at rated conditions is know n as the base speed. By using variable fre­ quency control, it is possible to adjust the speed of the m otor either above or be­ low base speed. A properly designed variable-frequency induction
 m otor drive  can be very flexible. It can control the speed of an induction m otor over a range  from as little as 5 percent of base speed up to about twice base speed. H owev er, it  is important to maintain certain voltage and torque limits on the m otor as the fre­ quency is varied, to ensure safe operation.  Wh en running at speeds below the base speed of the motor, it is necessary  to reduce the terminal voltage applied to the stator for proper operation. 1lle ter­ minal voltage applied t
o the stator should be decreased linearly with decreasing  INDUCT ION MOTORS 439  T, T,  T,  T, T,  T, T, T,  T,  Lines Lines  S",""  L, L, L, S"""d L, L, L,  Low T, T, T,  T4, T~ T6  Low T, T, T,  Tt-T2-Tj  H igh T,  T,  T,  S",""  L,  Low T,  H igh T,  FIGU R E 7-41  T,  (a)  T,  T,  Lines  L,  T,  T,  (,)  T,  T,  L,  T,  T,  0",,"  T)-TrTJ  together  T,  T4, T." T6  0",,"  T)-TrTJ  together  H igh T, T, T,  (b)  (b,  H igh speed  1:: (all)  , l""d(:"'::::1r---' ~  (Cl  Speed, rlmin  (d)  tog
ether  T4, T~, T6  0",,"  Po ssible connections of the stator coils in a pole-changing motor. together with the resulting  torque-speed characteristics: (a) Constant-torque connection- the torque capabilities of the motor  remain approximately constant in both high-speed and low-speed connections. (b) Constant­ lwrsepok'er connection---lhe power capabilities of the motor remain approximately constant in both  h.igh-speed and low-speed connections. (el Fan torque connection---lhe torque capabilit
ies of the  motor change with speed in the same manner as f.an-type loads.  440 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  800 ,-------------------------------------,  700  600  ,  • Z 500  • ¥ 400  ~  I 300  200  lOO e--,  800  700  600  ,  •  Z 500  • ~ 400  " ,  300 0  ~  200  100  0  0  ""G UR E 7-42  M echanical speed. r/min  ,.,  1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500  M echanical speed. r/min  ,b,  Variable-frequency speed control in an induction motor: (a) The family of torque-speed  characteristic c
urves for speeds below base speed. assuming that the line voltage is derated linearly  with frequency. (b) The family of torque-speed characteristic curves for speeds above base speed.  assuming that the line voltage is held constant.  INDU CT ION MOTORS 441  800,-------------------------------------,  700  600  ,  • Z 500  ,~ 400  ] 300  • 200P\\-------\  o o 500  FIGU RE 7-42 (roncluded)  1000 1500 2000  M echanical speed. r/min  I"  (c) The torque-speed characteristic curves for all frequenci
es.  2500 3000 3500  stator frequency. This process is called derating. If it is not done, the steel in the  core of the induction m otor will saturate and excessive ma gnetization currents  will flow in the ma chine.  To understand the necessity for derating, recall that an induction motor is  basically a rotating transfonner. As with any transfonner, the flux in the core of an  induction motor can be found from Faraday's law:  vet) = -N~ dl (1-36)  If a voltage vet) = VM sin wt is applied to t
he core, the resulting flux ~ is  'Wi ~ J h l)dl  p  = ~ !VM sinwtdt  p  I ~t) = -~cos wt l (7-57)  N ote that the electrical frequency appears in the denominator of this expression.  Th erefore, if the electrical frequency applied to the stator decreases by 10 percent  while the ma gnitude of the voltage appl ied to the stator remains constant, the flux  in the core of the m otor wi I I increase by about 10 percent and the ma gnetization  current of the motor will increase. In the unsaturated r
egion of the motor's  442 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ma gnetization curve, the increase in ma gnetization current will also be about 10  percent. H owever, in the saturated region of the m otor's ma gnetiwtion curve, a 10  percent increase in flux requires a mu ch larger increase in ma gnetization current.  Induction m otors are normally designed to operate near the saturation point on  their ma gnetization curves, so the increase in flux due to a decrease in frequency  will cause excessiv
e ma gnetization currents to flow in the motor. (This same prob­ lem was observed in transfonners; see Section 2.12.)  To avoid excessive ma gnetization currents, it is customary to decrease the  applied stator voltage in direct proportion to the decrease in frequency whenever  the frequency falls below the rated frequency of the m otor. Since the applied volt­ age v appears in the num erator of Equation (7-57) and the frequency wappears in  the denominator of Equation (7-57), the two effects co
unteract each other, and the  ma gnetization current is unaffected.  Wh en the voltage applied to an induction motor is varied linearly with fre­ quency below the base speed, the flux in the m otor will remain approximately  constant. TIlerefore, the maximum torque which the m otor can supply remains  fairly high. H oweve r, the maximum power rating of the m otor mu st be decreased  linearly with decreases in frequency to protect the stator circuit from overheating.  TIle power supplied to a thr
ee-phase induction motor is given by  P = v'JVLIL cos (J  If the voltage VL is decreased, then the maximum power P mu st also be decreased,  or else the current flow ing in the m otor wi II become excessive, and the m otor will  overheat.  Figure 7-42a shows a family of induction motor torque-speed characteris­ tic curves for speeds below base speed, assuming that the ma gnitude of the stator  voltage varies linearly with frequency.  When the electrical frequency applied to the m otor exceeds th
e rated fre­ quency of the m otor, the stator voltage is held constant at the rated value. Al­ though saturation considerations would pennit the voltage to be raised above the  rated value under these circumstances, it is limited to the rated voltage to protect  the winding insulation of the m otor. Th e higher the electrical frequency above  base speed, the larger the denominator of Equation (7-57) becomes. Since the nu­ m erator tenn is held constant above rated frequency, the resulting flux i
n the ma­ chine decreases and the maximum torque decreases with it. Figure 7-42b shows a  family of induction motor torque-speed characteristic curves for speeds above  base speed, assuming that the stator voltage is held constant.  If the stator voltage is varied linearly with frequency below base speed and  is held constant at rated value above base speed, then the resulting family of  torque-speed characteristics is as show n in Figure 7-42c. TIle rated speed for the  motor show n in Figure 7
-42 is 1800 r/min.  In the past, the principal disadvantage of electrical frequency control as a  method of speed changing was that a dedicated generator or me chanical fre­ quency changer was required to make it operate. This problem has disappeared  with the development of modern solid-state variable-frequency m otor drives. In  INDU CT ION MOTORS 443  800  700  600  E  "" Z  ;  ~  400 ~  • , , • 300  •  /  -/ Lo,'  200  100  0 -------- 0 250 '00 ""  1000 1250 1500 1750 2000  M echanical speed
. r/min  FIGURE 7-43  Variable-line-voltage speed control in an induction motor.  fact, changing the line frequency with solid-state motor drives has become the  m ethod of choice for induction motor speed control. N ote that this m ethod can be  used with any induction motor, unlike the pole-changing technique, which re­ quires a m otor with special stator windings.  A typical solid-state variable-frequency induction m otor drive will be de­ scribed in Section 7.10.  Speed Co ntrol by Chang ing
 the Line Vo ltage  The torque developed by an induction m otor is proportional to the square of the  applied voltage. Ifa load has a torque-speed characteristic such as the one show n  in Figure 7-43, then the speed of the motor may be controlled over a limited range  by varying the line voltage. This m ethod of speed control is sometimes used on  small m otors driving fans.  Speed Co ntrol by Chang ing the Rotor Resistance  In wo und-rotor induction m otors, it is possible to change the shape 
of the  torque-speed curve by inserting extra resistances into the rotor circuit of the ma­ chine. The resulting torque-speed characteristic curves are shown in Figure 7-44.  444 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  800  700 R, R, R,  (j()()  E  500  Z  • ,  ~ 400 g  " , ,  ~ 300  R ] '" 2Ro  200 R 2", 3Ro  R J ",4Ro  RJ '" 5Ro  100 R 3", 6Ro  0  0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 17'" 2000  M echanical speed. r/min  fo'IGU R E 7-44  Speed control by varying the rotor resistance of a wound-rotor inducti
on motor.  If the torque-speed curve of the load is as show n in the figure, then changing the  rotor resistance will change the operating speed of the m otor. H owever, inserting  extra resistances into the rotor circuit of an induction motor seriously reduces the  efficiency of the ma chine. Such a m ethod of speed control is nonnally used only  for short periods because of this efficiency problem.  7.10 SOLID·STATE INDU CTION  MOTOR DRIVES  As mentioned in the previous section, the method of 
choice today for induction  motor speed control is the solid-state variable-frequency induction motor drive. A  typical drive of this sort is show n in Figure 7--45. TIle drive is very flexible: its in­ put power can be either single-phase or three-phase, either 50 or 60 H z, and any­ where from 208 to 230 V. Th e output from this drive is a three-phase set of volt­ ages whose frequency can be varied from 0 up to 120 H z and whose voltage can  be varied from 0 V up to the rated voltage of the m 
otor.  TIle output voltage and frequency control is achieved by using the pulse­ width modulation (PW M) techniques described in Chapter 3. Both output frequency  and output voltage can be controlled independently by pulse-width modulation. fig­ ure 7--46 illustrates the mann er in which the PWM drive can control the output fre­ quency while maintaining a constant nn s voltage level, while Figure 7--47 illustrates  •  •  /  Voltage. V  Voltage. V  100  20  o  10  - 100  FIGURE  7 -4 6  INDU CT I
O N M O TO RS  445  fo'IGURE 7 -45  A typical solid-state variable-frequency induction motor  drive.  (Courtesy  of  M agneTek,  In c.)  I.  ms  (a)  30  40  50  I.  ms  ,bl  Variable-frequency control with a  PWM  waveform : (a)  6O- H z..  120-V  PWM  waveform: (b) 30-H z.  12()' V PW M waveform.   446 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Voltage, V  100  t, ms  -100  "J  Voltage, V  100  10 30 50  O ~  mf t, ms  -100  20 40  'bJ  ""GURE 7-47  Variable voltage control with a PWM wave form: (a) 6O-
H z, 120-V PWM waveform: (b) 6().H z,  6(). V PWM waveform .  the manner in which the PWM drive can control the nns voltage level while main­ taining a constant frequency.  As w e described in Section 7.9, it is often desirable to vary the output fre­ quency and output nns voltage together in a linear fashion. Figure 7-48 show s  typical output voltage wav efonn s from one phase of the drive for the situation in  which frequency and voltage are varied simultaneously in a linear fashion.· Fig­ ur
e 7-48a show s the output voltage adjusted for a frequency of60 H z and an nn s  voltage of 120 V. Figure 7-48b show s the output adjusted for a frequency of 30  H z and an nn s voltage of 60 V, and Figure 7-48c show s the output adjusted for a  frequency of 20 H z and an nn s voltage of 40 V. N otice that the peak voltage out  of the dri ve remains the sam e in all three cases; the nn s voltage level is controlled  by the fraction of time the voltage is switched on, and the frequency is control
led  by the rate at which the polarity of the pulses switches from positive to negative  and back again.  TIle typical induction motor drive shown in Figure 7-45 has man y built-in  features which contribute to its adjustability and ease of use. H ere is a summary  of some of these features.  *The output waveforms in Figure 7-47 are actually simplified waveforms. The real induction motor  drive has a much higher carrier frequency than that shown in the figure.  INDU CT ION MOTORS 447  Voltage. V
 P\VM waveform  t. ms  ,.,  Voltage. V P\VM waveform  100  20 30  o  10 40 50 t. ms  -100  ,b,  Voltage. V PWM waveform  100  oWUlli:lm  30 , 40  t. ms  -100  10 20  ,< ,  FIGURE 7-48  Simultaneous voltage and frequency control with a P\VM wavefonn: (a) 6O-H z. 120-V PWM  waveform: (b) 30-H z. 60-V PWM waveform: (c) 2O-H z. 40-V PWM waveform.  Frequency (Speed) Adjustment  Th e output frequency of the drive can be controlled manually from a control  m ounted on the drive cabinet, or it can be co
ntrolled remotely by an external volt­ age or current signal. Th e ability to adjust the frequency of the drive in response  to some external signal is very important, since it permits an external computer or  process controller to control the speed of the motor in accordance with the over­ all needs of the plant in which it is installed.  448 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  A Choice of Voltage and Frequency Patterns  TIle types of m echanical loads which mi ght be attached to an induction moto
r  vary greatly. Some loads such as fans require very little torque wh en starting (or  running at low speeds) and have torques which increase as the square of the speed.  Other loads might be harder to start, requiring m ore than the rated full-load torque  of the motor just to get the load m oving. TIlis drive provides a variety of voltage­ versus-frequency patterns which can be selected to match the torque from the in­ duction motor to the torque required by its load. TIlree of these patterns
 are shown  in Figures 7-49 through 7-5 J.  Figure 7-49a show s the standard or general-purpose voltage-versus­ frequency pattern, described in the previous section. This pattern changes the out­ put voltage linearly with changes in output frequency for speeds below base speed  and holds the output voltage constant for speeds above base speed. (The small  constant-voltage region at very low frequencies is necessary to ensure that there  will be som e starting torque at the very low est speeds.) 
Figure 7-49b show s the  resulting induction motor torque-speed characteristics for several operating fre­ quencies below base speed.  Figure 7-50a show s the voltage-versus-frequency pattern used for loads  with high starting torques. This pattern also changes the output voltage linearly  with changes in output frequency for speeds below base speed, but it has a shal­ lower slope at frequencies below 30 H z. For any given frequency below 30 H z,  the output voltage will be higherthan it wa s wi
th the previous pattern. This higher  voltage will produce a higher torque, but at the cost of increased ma gnetic satura­ tion and higher ma gnetization currents. The increased saturation and higher cur­ rents are often acceptable for the short periods required to start heavy loads. Fig­ ure 7-50b show s the induction m otor torque-speed characteristics for several  operating frequencies below base speed. N otice the increased torque available at  low frequencies compared to Figure 7-49b.  Figu
re 7-51a show s the voltage-versus-frequency pattern used for loads  with low starting torques (called soft-start loads). TIlis pattern changes the output  voltage parabolically with changes in output frequency for speeds below base  speed. For any given frequency below 60 H z, the output voltage will be lower  than it wa s with the standard pattern. TIlis lower voltage will produce a lower  torque, providing a slow, sm ooth start for low-torque loads. Figure 7-5 I b show s  the induction motor 
torque-speed characteristics for several operating frequencies  below base speed. N otice the decreased torque available at low frequencies com­ pared to Figure 7-49.  Independently Adjustable Acceleration  and Deceleration Ramps  Wh en the desired operating speed of the m otor is changed, the drive controlling it  will change frequency to bring the m otor to the new operating speed. If the speed  change is sudden (e.g., an instantaneous jump from 900 to 1200 rIm in), the drive  v  8O\l  700  ro
o  E  • '00  Z  • , 4O\l ~  ~  300  WO  100  0  0  FIGU R E 7-49  INDU CT IO N M O TO RS 449  O~----------~ffiC----------C1~Wc---- f HZ  f_.  (a)  Torque--speed characteristic  200 4O\l roo 800 1000 12lXl 1400  Speed. rlmin  ,b,  1roo 18O\l  (a) Possible voltage-versus-frequency patterns for the solid-state variable-frequency induction motor  drive: general-purpose paT/ern. Th is pattern consists of a linear voltage-frequency curve below rated  frequency and a constant voltage above rated freque
ncy. (b) The resulting torque-speed  characteristic curves for speeds below rated frequency (speeds above rated frequency look like  Figure 7-4lb).  450 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  ,  •  Z  • ,  ~  ~  8O\l  700  600  5O\l  2llll  100  v  V .. ,od  , , ,  , ,  , , , ,  o!------~60~----~1~2~O--f. H z  f~.  "I  Torque-speed characteristic  O ~~~~~~~-o~L,,~-e~-+~-..~-.t, o 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800  Speed. r/min  'hI  fo'IG UR E 7-50  (a) Possible voltage-versus-frequency 
patterns for the solid-state variable-frequency induction motor  drive: high-starting-torque patfem. This is a modified voltage-frequency pattern suitable for loads  requiring high starting torques. lt is the same as the linear voltage-frequency pattern except at low  speeds. The voltage is disproportionately high at very low speeds. which produces extra torque at the  cost of a h.igher magnetization current. (b) The resulting torque-speed characteristic curves for  speeds below rated frequency 
(speeds above rated frequency look like Figure 7--41b).  INDU CT IO N M OTORS 451  v  O~----------iro'----------'I~Wo---- f Hz  (a)  8O\l  Torque--speed characteristic  700  roo  E  • '00  Z  • , 4O\l ~  ~ 300  WO  100  0  0 200 4O\l 800 1000 12lXl 1400 lroo 18O\l  Speed. r/min  'h'  FIGURE 7-51  (a) Possible voltage-versus-frequency patterns for the solid-state variable-frequency induction motor  drive:fan torque pattern. This is a voltage-frequency pattern suitable for use with motors driving 
 fans and centrifugal pumps. which have a very low starting torque. (b) The resulting torque-speed  characteristic curves for speeds below rated frequency (speeds above rated frequency look like  Figure 7-4lb).  452 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  does not try to make the m otor instantaneously jump from the old desired speed  to the new desired speed. Instead, the rate of motor acceleration or deceleration is  limited to a safe level by special circuits built into the electronics of the drive.
  TIlese rates can be adjusted independently for accelerations and decelerations.  Motor Protection  TIle induction motor drive has built into it a variety of features designed to protect  the m otor attached to the drive. The drive can detect excessive steady-state cur­ rents (an overload condition), excessive instantaneous currents, overvoltage con­ ditions, or undervoltage conditions. In any of the above cases, it will shut down  the m otor.  Induction motor drives like the one described abov
e are now so flexible and  reliable that induction m otors with these drives are displacing dc m otors in many  applications which require a wide range of speed variation.  7.11 DETERMINING C IRCUIT  MODEL PARAMETERS  TIle equivalent circuit of an induction motor is a very useful tool for detennining  the m otor's response to changes in load. H ow ever, if a mod el is to be used for a  real ma chine, it is necessary to detennine what the element val ues are that go into  the model. H ow can R l>
 R2 , X l> X 2, and XM be detennined for a real m otor?  Th ese pieces of information may be found by perfonning a series of tests on  the induction motor that are analogous to the short-circuit and open-circuit tests in  a transfonner. TIle tests mu st be performed under precisely controlled conditions,  since the resistances vary with temperature and the rotor resistance also varies  with rotor frequency. Th e exact details of how each induction motor test mu st be  perform ed in order to achi
eve accurate results are described in IEEE Standard  11 2. A lthough the details of the tests are very complicated, the concepts behind  them are relatively straightforward and will be explained here.  The No-Load Test  TIle no-load test of an induction motor mea sures the rotational losses of the m o­ tor and provides infonnation about its ma gnetization current. The test circuit for  this test is shown in Figure 7-52a. Wattmeters, a voltmeter, and three ammeters  are connected to an induction 
m otor, which is allowed to spin freely. The only  load on the m otor is the friction and winda ge losses, so all P eon v in this m otor is  consum ed by m echanical losses, and the slip of the m otor is very small (possibly  as small as 0.001 or less). TIle equivalent circuit of this m otor is shown in Figure  7-52b. With its very small slip, the resistance corresponding to its power con­ verted, Rl l - sys, is mu ch mu ch larger than the resistance corresponding to the  rotor copper losses R 2
 and mu ch larger than the rotor reactance X2. I n this case, the  equivalent circuit reduces approximately to the last circuit in Figure 7-52b. There,  Initial  Variable  voltage,  variable  frequency,  three-phase  power  00.=  I,  -+  equivalent  V . ( cin:uit:  I,  Since - R2('~S)>>R2 +  v.( ,,'  R 2 ('- s)>>X 2, ,  this cin:uit  reduces to:  +  Combining  V . (  RF&w and  Reyields:  FIG URE 7-52  R, jXt  R,  ,  R,  INDU CT IO N M O TO RS 453  I,  -P , A  I,  -A N o load  I,  -P, A lit + IB+
 Ie  IL = 3  ,.,  12= 0  - jX2 R,  " I. j  R, jXM ~ R2(';S)  ~ Rfri<:tiOll, win<b!O,  ~ &""'" »XM  'h'  The no-load test of an induction motor: (a) test circuit; (b) the resulting motor equivalent cin:uit.  N ote that at no load the motor's impedance is essentially the series combination of RI,jXj• andJXM .  the output resistor is in parallel w ith the m agnetization reactance XM and the core  losses Re.  In this m otor at no-load conditions, the input power m easured by the m eters  mu st equal
 the losses in the m otor. Th e rotor copper losses are negligible because  the current /l is extremely sm all [because of the large load resistance R2(1 - s)/s],  so they m ay be neglected. Th e stator copper losses are given by  454 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  so the input power mu st equal  P;o = P SC L + P.:orc + PF & W + Pmisc  = 3fr R I + P rot  where Prot is the rotational losses of the m otor:  PM = Poore + PF & W + Pmis.c  (7-25)  (7-58)  (7-59)  TI1U S, given the input power to t
he m otor, the rotational losses of the ma chine ma y  be detennined.  TIle equivalent circuit that describes the m otor operating in this condition  contains resistors R e and R 2( I - sys in parallel with the ma gnetizing reactance X M .  Th e current needed to establish a magnetic field is quite large in an induction m o­ tor, because of the high reluctance of its air gap, so the reactance XM will be mu ch  smaller than the resistances in parallel with it and the overall input pow er factor  
will be very sm all. With the large lagging current, m ost of the voltage drop will be  across the inductive comp onents in the circuit. The equivalent input impedance is  thus approxim ately  (7-60)  and if X l can be found in som e other fashion, the ma gnetizing impedance XM will  be known for the m otor.  The DC Test for Stator Resistance  TIle rotor resistance R2 plays an extrem ely critical role in the operation of an in­ duction motor. A m ong other things, R l determines the shape of the
 torque-speed  curve, detennining the speed at which the pullout torque occurs. A standard m o­ tor test called the locked-rotor test can be used to detennine the total m otor circuit  resistance (this test is taken up in the next section). H ow ever, this test ftnds only  the total resistance. To find the rotor resistance R l accurately, it is necessary to  know R I so that it can be subtracted from the total.  TIlere is a test for Rl independent of Rl, X l and X2. This test is called the dc  t
est. B asically, a dc voltage is applied to the stator windings of an induction m o­ tor. B ecause the current is dc, there is no induced voltage in the rotor circuit and  no resulting rotor current now. Also, the reactance of the m otor is zero at direct  current. TIlerefore, the only quantity limiting current n ow in the m otor is the sta­ tor resistance, and that resistance can be detennined.  TIle basic circuit for the dc test is shown in Figure 7-53. This figure show s  a dc power supply co
nnected to two of the three terminals of a V-connected in­ duction motor. To perfonn the test, the current in the stator windings is adjusted to  the rated value, and the voltage between the terminals is me asured. TIle current in  Voc  (variable)  +  '-/  FIGU RE 7-53  Current­ limiting  resistor  Test ci['(;uit for a dc resistance test.  INDU CT ION MOTORS 455  R,  the stator windings is adjusted to the rated value in an attempl to heat the wind­ ings to the same temperature they would have du
ring nonnal operation (rem em­ ber, winding resistance is a function of temperature).  Th e currenl in Figure 7-53 flows through two of the windings, so the total  resistance in the current path is 2R t. Th erefore,  Voe  2Rt = -J- oe  I R , Vee I 2loc (7-61)  With this value of R t the stator copper losses at no load may be detennined,  and the rotational losses ma y be found as the difference between the input power  at no load and the stator copper losses.  Th e value of R t calculated in thi
s fashion is not completely accurate, since  it neglects the skin effect that occurs w hen an ac voltage is applied to the wind­ ings. M ore details concerning corrections for temperature and skin effect can be  found in IEEE Standard 11 2.  The Locked-Rotor Test  Th e third test that can be perfonned on an induction m otor to detennine its circuit  parameters is called the locked-rotor test, or sometimes the blocked-rotor test.  This test corresponds to the short-circuit test on a transformer. 
In this test, the ro­ tor is locked or blocked so that it cannot m ove, a voltage is applied to the m otor,  and the resulting voltage, current, and power are mea sured.  Figure 7-54a show s the connections for the locked-rotor test. To perform  the locked-rotor test, an ac voltage is applied to the stator, and the current flow is  adjusted to be approximately full-load value. When the current is full-load value,  the voltage, current, and power flow ing into the m otor are mea sured. TIle equiv
a­ lent circuit for this test is shown in Figure 7-54b. N otice that since the rotor is not  m oving, the slip s = 1, and so the rotor resistance Ris is just equal to R2 (quite a  456 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I,  - Adjustable- V  voltage. I,  adjustable- b -A frequency.  three-phase  power source I,  , -A  ,,'  I, R, I,  -- v,  'h'  I<'IGURE 7-54  p  p  /,= /,= It .. ,  X M »IR2+jX21  Rc »IR2 + jX21  So neglect Rc and X M  The locked-rotor test for an induction motor: (a) test circuit:
 (b) motor equivalem circuit.  small value). Since R 2 and X2 are so small, almost all the input current will flow  through them, instead of through the mu ch larger ma gnetizing reactance XM .  Th erefore, the circuit under these conditions looks like a series combination of X ],  R ], X 2 , and R l.  nlere is one problem with this test, however. In nonnal operation, the stator  frequency is the line frequency of tile power system (50 or 60 H z). At starting con­ ditions, the rotor is also at l
ine frequency. Howeve r, at nonnal operating conditions,  the slip of m ost motors is only 2 to 4 percent, and the resulting rotor frequency is  in the range of I to 3 H z. nlis creates a problem in that the line frequency does not  represent the nonnal operating conditions of the rotor. Since effective rotor resis­ tance is a strong function of frequency for design class Band C motors, the incor­ rect rotor frequency can lead to misleading results in this test. A typical compro­ mise is to use 
a frequency 25 percent or less of the rated frequency. While this  approach is acceptable for essentially constant resistance rotors (design classes A  and D ), it leaves a lot to be desired when one is trying to find the nonnal rotor re­ sistance of a variable-resistance rotor. Because of these and similar problems, a  great deal of care mu st be exercised in taking mea surements for these tests.  INDUCTION MOTORS 457  After a test voltage and frequency have been set up, the current flow in the
  motor is quickly adjusted to about the rated value, and the input power, voltage,  and current are m easured before the rotor can heat up too mu ch. 1lle input power  to the motor is given by  P = V3"VT IL cos (J  so the locked-rotor power factor can be found as  PF = cos (} = V3V, I  "  and the impedance angle (J is just equal to cos-l PF.  (7-62)  Th e ma gnitude of the total impedance in the m otor circuit at this time is  and the angle of the total impedance is O. Th erefore,  ~ = RLR + jX
i.R  ~ IZ"loo, e + jIZ"I'in e  Th e locked-rotor resistance RLR is equal to  I R" - R, + R, I  while the locked-rotor reactance X~ is equal to  X LR = X ; + X ;  (7-63)  (7-64)  (7-65)  (7-66)  where X ; and X ; are the stator and rotor reactances at the test frequency,  respectively.  Th e rotor resistance R l can now be found as  (7-67)  wh ere R l w as detennined in the dc test. The total rotor reactance referred to the sta­ tor can also be found. Since the reactance is directly proportional 
to the frequency,  the total equivalent reactance at the nonnal operating frequency can be found as  X LR = ~ra1.ed X LR = Xl + X 2  llesl  (7-68)  Unfortunately, there is no simple way to separate the contributions of the  stator and rotor reactances from each other. O ver the years, experience has shown  that m otors of certain design types have certain proportions between the rotor and  stator reactances. Figure 7-55 summariz es this experience. In nonnal practice, it  really does not matter 
just how X LR is broken down, since the reactance appears as  the sum X I + X 2 in all the torque equations.  458 ELECTR IC M AC HINE R Y RJNDA M ENTALS  Xl and Xl as fun ctions of X LR  R otor Dcsi ~n X, X,  Wound rotor 0.5 XU! 0.5 XU!  Design A 0.5 XU! 0.5 XU!  Design B 0.4 XU! 0.6 XU!  Design C 0.3 XU! 0.7 XU!  Design D 0.5 XU! 0.5 XU!  H GU R E 7-55  Rules of thumb for dividing rotor and stator ci["(;uit reactance.  Exa mpl e 7-S. The following test data were taken on a 7.S-hp, four-pole, 20
S-V,  60-H z, design A, Y-colUlected induction motor having a rated current of 28 A.  DC test:  No-load test:  Voc = 13.6 V  Vr = 20SV  IA = S.12A  la= S.20A  le= S.18A  loc = 28.0A  f= 60 H z  P",,=420W  Locked-rotor test:  Vr = 25 V  IA = 28.IA  fa= 28.0A  Ie = 27.6A  f= IS H z  P"" = 920W  (a) Sketch the per-phase equivalent circuit for this motor.  (b) Find the slip at the pullout torque, and find the value of the pullout torque itself.  Solutio"  (a) From the dc test,  Voc 13.6 V  R[ = 2/0c
 = 2(2S.0A) = 0.2430  From the no-load test,  IL.av = S.12A + 8.2~A + 8.ISA = S.17A  20S V  V</l,nl = ~= 1lOV  INDU CT ION MOTORS 459  Therefore,  1 1  120 V Z nJ = 8.17 A = 14.70 = X I + XM  When XI is known, XM can be fOlUld. The stator copper losses are  PSCL = 3/f R I = 3(8.17 A)2(0.243 n) = 48.7 W  Therefore, the no-load rotational losses are  = 420W - 48.7 W = 371.3 W  From the locked-rotor test,  I = 28.IA + 28.0A + 27.6A = 279A  L .av 3 .  The locked-rotor impedance is  1 1_1'._--"'-_ 25
V - ZLR - 110. - ..;J/1o. - V3"(27.9 A) - 0.517 n  and the impedance angle (J is  _ _ I P,n  () - cos V!VTh  _ _ I 920W  - cos v'3(25 VX27.9 A)  = cos- t 0.762 = 40.40  Therefore, RLR = 0.517 cos 40.4° = 0.394 0 = R I + R2. SinceR I = 0.243 n,  R 2 must be 0.151 n. The reactance at IS H z is  X LR = 0.517 sin 40.4 0  = 0.335 0  The equivalent reactance at 60 Hz is  X LR = ;: X LR = ( ~~~~) 0.3350 = 1.340  For design class A induction motors, this reactance is assumed to be divided  equally betwe
en the rotor and stator, so  X I = X2 = 0.67 n  XM = IZruI -X I = 14.7 n - 0.67 0 = 14.03 n  The final per-phase equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 7-56.  (b) For this equivalent circuit, the Thevenin equivalents are fOlUld from Equations  (7-41 b), (7-44), and (7-45) to be  Vlll = 114.6 V Rlll = 0.221 n Xlll = 0.67 n  Therefore, the slip at the pullout torque is given by  ,~~~R~,~~~, ' -m ox - v'R~ + (Xlll + X ;ll (7-53)  460 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  R,  ""GURE 7-56  jO.67 fl. ,  ,  
,  ,  Rc -s:  (unknown) <­ ,  ,  ,  ,  jXM =j14.03fl.  Mot or per-phase equivalent circuit for Example 7-8.  = 0.1510 =0 .111 = 11.1%  V(0.243 0)2 + (0.67 0 + 0.67 0)2  The maximum torque of this motor is given by  Tmox = 2 W 'YDC [Rll{ + V Rfu + (Xll{ + X2)]  _ 3(114.6 V) l  (7-54)  - 2(188.5 rad/s)[O.22 1 0 + V(0 .221 Of + (0.670 + 0.67 Of]  = 66.2N o m  7.12 THE INDUCTION GENERATOR  TIle torque-speed characteristic curve in Figure 7- 20 shows that if an induction  m otor is driven at a speed 
greater than n.y"" by an external prime m over, the di­ rection of its inducted torque will reverse and it will act as a generator. As the  torque applied to its shaft by the prime m over increases, the amount of power pro­ duced by the induction generator increases. As Figure 7-57 shows, there is a max ­ imum possible induced torque in the generator mod e of operation. This torque is  know n as the pushover torque of the generator. If a prime m over applies a torque  greater than the pushover t
orque to the shaft of an induction generator, the gener­ ator wil I overspeed.  As a generator, an induction ma chine has severe limitations. Because it  lacks a separate field circuit, an induction generator cannot produce reactive  power. In fact, it consume s reactive power, and an external source of reactive  power mu st be connected to it at all times to maintain its stator ma gnetic field.  1llis external source of reacti ve power mu st also control the terminal voltage of  the generator-w
ith no field current, an induction generator cannot control its  ow n output voltage. Normally, the generator's voltage is maintained by the exter­ nal power system to which it is connected.  1lle one great advantage of an induction generator is its simplicity. An in­ duction generator does not need a separate field circuit and does not have to be  driven continuously at a fixed speed. As long as the ma chine's speed is some  , 0 0  •  - 1(XX)  -1500  0  FIGURE 7-57  ~  region  Generator  region
  ~  1000 _/2000  "~  M echanical speed. r/min  Pushover  torque  3000  INDU CT ION MOTORS 461  The torque-speed characteristic of an induction machine. showing the generator region of operation.  Note the pushover torque.  value greater than n.ync for the power system to which it is connected, it will func­ tion as a generator. Th e greater the torque applied to its shaft (up to a certain  point), the greater its resulting output power. TIle fact that no fancy regulation is  required mak es thi
s generator a gooj choice for windmills, heat recovery system s,  and similar supplementary power sources attached to an existing power system. In  such applications, power-factor correction can be provided by capacitors, and the  generator's tenninal voltage can be controlled by the external power system.  The Induction Generator Operating Alone  It is also possible for an induction ma chine to function as an isolated generator, in­ dependent of any power system, as long as capacitors are avail
able to supply the  reactive power required by the generator and by any attached loads. Such an iso­ lated induction generator is show n in Figure 7-58.  Th e ma gnetizing current 1M required by an induction ma chine as a function  of tenninal voltage can be found by running the ma chine as a m otor at no load and  m easuring its annature current as a function ofterrninal voltage. Such a ma gneti­ zation curve is show n in Figure 7-59a. To achieve a given voltage level in an in­ duction generato
r, external capacitors mu st supply the ma gnetization current cor­ responding to that level.  Since the reactive current that a capacitor can produce is directly proportional  to the voltage applied to it, the locus of all possible combinations of voltage and  current through a capacitor is a straight line. Such a plot of voltage versus current  462 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Terminals  p I,  - - Th ree-phase  induction  generator  - -Q p  IQ -Q  To loads  Capacitor bank  ""GURE 7-58  An 
induction generator operating alone with a capacitor bank to supply reactive power.  for a given frequency is shown in Figure 7-59b. If a three-phase set of capacitors  is connected across the terminnls of an induction generator, the no-load voltage of  the induction generator will be the intersection of the generator's magnetization  CUlVe and the capacitor s load line. TIle no-load tenninal voltage of an induction  generator for three different sets of capacit.:1.nce is shown in Figure 7-59c. 
 How does the voltage build up in an induction generator when it is first  started? When an induction generator first starts to turn, the residual ma gnetism in  its field circuit produces a smal I voltage. TImt smal I voltage produces a capacitive  current flow, which increases the voltage, further increasing the capacitive cur­ rent, and so forth until the voltage is fully built up. If no residual flux is present in  the induction generator's rotor, then its voltage will not build up, and it m
u st be  ma gnetized by m om entarily running it as a m otor.  TIle mo st serious problem with an induction generator is that its voltage  varies wildly with changes in load, especially reactive load. Typical tenninal char­ acteristics of an induction generator operating alone with a constant parallel ca­ pacitance are show n in Figure 7-60. N otice that, in the case of inductive loading,  the voltage collapses very rapidly. This happens because the fixed capacitors mu st  supply all the reactiv
e power needed by both the load and the generator, and any  reactive power diverted to the load m oves the generator back along its ma gneti­ zation curve, causi ng a major drop in generator voltage. It is therefore very diffi­ cult to start an induction motor on a power system supplied by an induction gen­ erator- special techniques mu st be employed to increase the effective capacitance  during starting and then decrease it during nonnal operation.  Because of the nature of the induction ma ch
ine's torque-speed characteristic,  an induction generator's frequency varies with changing loads: but since the  torque-speed characteristic is very steep in the nonnal operating range, the total fre­ quency variation is usually limited to less than 5 percent. This amount of variation  may be quite acceptable in many isolated or em ergency generator applications.  INDU CT IO N M OTORS 463  Capacitor bank:  voltage Vc- V  (1M " no-load armature current)  (Lagging amperes)  (a)  M edium C  Small 
C  -------------;'---- -----------r --- '0'  FIGU R E 7-59  Small M edium capacitance C  (mediumZd capacitance  C / ~/  (large Zcl / ~  / /  1 /  / / / ~ Large capacitance C  / ~ ~ (Small Zcl  1/ ,  (Capacitor bank: current)  (leading amperes)  ,b,  I  Large C  (a) The magnetization curve of an induction machine. It is a plot of the tenninal voltage of the  machine as a function of its magnetization current (w hich lags the phase voltage by approximately  90°). (b) P lot of the voltage-.::urrent
 characteristic of a capacitor bank:. N ote that the larger the  capacitance. the greater its current for a given voltage. This current leads the phase voltage by  approximately 90°. (c) The no-load terntinal voltage for an isolated induction generator can be found  by ploning the generator terminal characteristic and the capacitor voltage-.::urrent characteristic on a  single set of axes. The intersection of the two curves is the point at which the reactive power  demanded by the generator is e
xactly supplied by the capacitors. and this point gives the no-load  ferminall"Oltage of the generator.  464 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  ""GU R E 7-60  The terminal voItage--<:urrent characteristic of an induction generator for a load with a constant  lagging power factor.  Induction Generator Applications  Induction generators have been used since early in the twentieth century, but by  the 1960s and 1970s they had largely disappeared from use. H oweve r, the induc­ tion generator ha
s made a comeba ck since the oil price shocks of 1973. With en­ ergy costs so high, energy recovery becam e an important part of the economics of  m ost industrial processes. Th e induction generator is ideal for such applications  because it requires very litt Ie in the way of control system s or maintenance.  B ecause of their simplicity and small size per kilowatt of output power, in­ duction generators are also favored very strongly for small windmi lls. M any com­ mercial windmi lls are des
igned to operate in parallel with large power system s,  supplying a fraction of the custom er's total power needs. In such operation, the  power system can be relied on for voltage and frequency control, and static ca­ pacitors can be used for power-factor correction.  7.13 INDU CT ION MOTOR RATINGS  A nam eplate for a typical high-efficiency integral-horsepower induction motor is  show n in Figure 7--61. Th e mo st important ratings present on the nameplate are  L Output power  2, Vo ltage  ),
 Current  4, Power factor  5, Speed  6, N ominal efficiency  INDUCT ION MOTORS 4 65  I ..... N O " . Hf .  LOUIS ALLIS  FIGU R E 7-61  Th e nameplate of a typical lIigh-efficiency induction motor. (Courtesy of MagneTek, Inc.)  7. NEMA design class  8. Starting code  A namep late for a typical standard-efficiency induction motor would be similar,  except that it might not show a nominal efficiency.  T he voltage limit on the m otor is based on the maximum acceptable ma g­ netization current flow,
 since the higher the voltage gets, the m ore saturated the  m otor's iron becomes and the higher its ma gnetization current becomes. Just as in  the case of transform ers and synchronous ma chines, a 60-H z induction motor ma y  be used on a 50-H z power system, but only if the voltage rating is decreased by an  amount proportional to the decrease in frequency. nlis derating is necessary be­ cause the flux in the core of the m otor is. proportional to the integral of the applied  466 ELECTRIC M
ACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  voltage. To keep the maximum nux in the core constant while the period of inte­ gration is increasing, the average voltage level mu st decrease.  TIle current limit on an induction mot or is based on the maximum acceptable  heating in the motor's windings, and the power limit is set by the combination of  the voltage and current ratings with the ma chine's power factor and efficiency.  NEMA design classes, starting code letters, and nom inal efficiencies were  discussed in
 previous sections of this chapter.  7.14 SUMMA R Y  TIle induction m otor is the m ost popular type of ac m otor because of its simplicity  and ease of operation. An induction motor does not have a separate field circuit; in­ stead, it depends on transfonner action to induce voltages and currents in its field  circuit. In fact, an induction motor is basically a rotating transfonner. Its equivalent  circuit is similar to that of a transfonner, except for the effects of varying speed.  An inducti
on motor nonnally operates at a speed near synchronous speed,  but it can never operate at exactly n,yDC . Th ere mu st always be some relative m o­ tion in order to induce a voltage in the induction motor's field circuit. TIle rotor  voltage induced by the relative m otion between the rotor and the stator ma gnetic  field produces a rotor current, and that rotor current interacts with the stator ma g­ netic field to produce the induced torque in the m otor.  In an induction motor, the slip or s
peed at which the maximum torque oc­ curs can be controlled by varying the rotor resistance. The value of that ma ximum  torque is independent of the rotor resistance. A high rotor resistance lowers the  speed at which maximum torque occurs and thus increases the starting torque of  the motor. H owever, it pays for this starting torque by having very poor speed reg­ ulation in its normal operating range. A low rotor resistance, on the other hand, re­ duces the m otor's starting torque while impr
oving its speed regulation. Any nor­ mal induction motor design mu st be a compromi se between these two conflicting  requirements.  One way to achieve such a compromi se is to employ deep-bar or double­ cage rotors. lllese rotors have a high effective resistance at starting and a low ef­ fective resistance under normal running conditions, thus yielding both a high  starting torque and good speed regulation in the same motor. The same effect can  be achieved with a wound-rotor induction motor if
 the rotor field resistance is  varied.  Speed control of induction m otors can be accomplished by changing the  number of poles on the ma chine, by changing the applied electrical frequency, by  changing the applied tenninal voltage, or by changing the rotor resistance in the  case of a wound-rotor induction m otor.  TIle induction ma chine can also be used as a generator as long as there is  some source of reactive power (capacitors or a synchronous ma chine) available in  the power system. An
 induction generator operating alone has serious voltage reg­ ulation problems, but when it operates in parallel with a large power system, the  power system can control the ma chine's voltage. Induction generators are usually  INDU CT ION MOTORS 467  rather small ma chines and are used principally with alternative energy sources,  such as windmills, or with energy recovery system s. A lm ost all the really large  generators in use are synchronou s generators.  QUESTIONS  7-1. What are slip and 
slip speed in an induction motor?  7-2. H ow does an induction motor develop torque?  7-3. Why is it impossible for an induction motor to operate at synchronous speed?  7-4. Sketch and explain the shape of a typical induction motor torque-speed characteris­ tic curve.  7-5. What equivalent circuit element has the mo st direct control over the speed at which  the pullout torque occurs?  7...(j. What is a deep-bar cage rotor? Why is it used? What NEMA design c1ass(es) can be  built with it?  7-7. 
What is a double-cage cage rotor? Why is it used? What NEMA design class(es) can  be built with it?  7-8. D escribe the characteristics and uses of wound-rotor induction motors and of each  NEMA design class of cage motors.  7-9. Why is the efficiency of an induction motor (wolUld-rotor or cage) so poor at high  slips?  7-10. N ame and describe four means of controlling the speed of induction motors.  7-11. Why is it necessary to reduce the voltage applied to an induction motor as electrical  fr
equency is reduced?  7-12. Why is tenninal voltage speed control limited in operating range?  7-13. What are starting code factors? What do they say about the starting current of an in- duction motor?  7-14. H ow does a resistive starter circuit for an induction motor work?  7-15. What infonnation is learned in a locked-rotor test?  7-16. What infonnation is learned in a no-load test?  7-17. What actions are taken to improve the efficiency of modern high-efficiency induc- tion motors?  7-18. Wha
t controls the tenninal voltage of an induction generator operating alone?  7-19. For what applications are induction generators typically used?  7-20. H ow can a wOlUld-rotor induction motor be used as a frequency changer?  7-21. H ow do different voltage-frequency patterns affect the torque-speed characteristics  of an induction motor?  7-22. D escribe the major features of the solid-state induction motor drive featured in Sec­ tion 7.10.  7-23. Two 480-V, lOO-hp induction motors are manufactu
red. One is designed for 50-H z  operation, and one is designed for 6O-H z operation, but they are otherwise similar.  Which of these machines is larger?  7-24. An induction motor is rlUlning at the rated conditions. If the shaft load is now in­ creased, how do the following quantities change?  (a) M echanical speed  (b) Slip  468 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (c) Rotor induced voltage  (d) Rotor current  (e) Rotor frequency  (j) PRCL  (g) Synchronous speed  PROBLEMS  7-1. A dc test is perfor
med on a 460-V. ~-connected. lOO-hp induction motor. If Voc =  24 V and foc = 80A. what is the stator resistance R ]? Wh y is this so?  7-2. A 220-V, three-phase. two-pole. 50-Hz induction motor is ruooing at a slip of 5 per­ cent. Find:  (a) The speed of the magnetic fields in revolutions per minute  (b) The speed of the rotor in revolutions per minute  (c) The slip speed of the rotor  (d) The rotor frequency in hertz  7-3. Answer the questions in Problem 7-2 for a 480-V. three-phase. four-pole
. 60-Hz in­ duction motor running at a slip of 0.035.  7-4. A three-phase. 60-Hz induction motor runs at 890 rhnin at no load and at 840 rlmin  at full load.  (a) H ow many poles does this motor have?  (b) What is the slip at rated load?  (c) What is the speed at one-quarter of the rated load?  (d) What is the rotor's electrical frequency at one-quarter of the rated load?  7-5, ASO-kW, 440-V, 50-H z, six-pole induction motor has a slip of 6 percent when op­ erating at full-load conditions. At fu
ll-load conditions, the friction and windage  losses are 300 W, and the core losses are 600 W. Find the following values for full­ load conditions:  (a) The shaft speed n ..  (b) The output power in watts  (c) The load torque 1lood in newton-meters  (d) The induced torque 11 ... in newton-meters  (e) The rotor frequency in hertz  7-6. A three-phase, 60-Hz, four-pole induction motor runs at a no-load speed of 1790  rlmin and a full-load speed of 1720 r/min. Calculate the slip and the electrical f
re­ quency of the rotor at no-load and full-load conditions. What is the speed regulation  of this motor [Equation (4-68)]?  7-7, A 208-V, two-pole, 60-Hz , V-connected woood-rotor induction motor is rated at  IS hp. Its equivalent circuit components are  Rl = 0.200 n  Xl = O.4lOn  P moc.b = 250 W  For a slip of 0.05, find  (a) The line ClUTent h  R2 = 0.120 n  X2 = 0.410 n  P.u.c""O  (b) The stator copper losses P SCL  (c) The air-gap power P AG  XM = IS.On  P<Ote = 180W  INDU CT ION MOTORS 469
  (d) The power converted from electrical to mechanical fonn P <oov  (e) The induced torque Tm  (f) The load torque Tload  (g) The overall machine efficiency  (h) The motor speed in revolutions per minute and radians per second  7-8. For the motor in Problem 7-7. what is the slip at the pullout torque? What is the  pullout torque of this motor?  7-9. (a) Calculate and plot the torque-speed characteristic of the motor in Problem 7-7.  (b) Calculate and plot the output power versus speed curve of 
the motor in Prob­ lem 7-7.  7-10. For the motor of Problem 7-7. how much additional resistance (referred to the sta­ tor circuit) would it be necessary to add to the rotor circuit to make the maximum  torque occur at starting conditions (when the shaft is not moving)? Plot the  torque-speed characteristic of this motor with the additional resistance inserted.  7-11. If the motor in Problem 7-7 is to be operated on a 50-H z power system. what must  be done to its supply voltage? Why? What will t
he equivalent circuit component  values be at 50 H z? An swer the questions in Problem 7-7 for operation at 50 H z  with a slip of 0.05 and the proper voltage for this machine.  7-12. Figure 7-18a show s a simple circuit consisting of a voltage source. a resistor. and  two reactances. Find the Thevenin equivalent voltage and impedance of this circuit  at the terminals. Then derive the expressions for the magnitude of Vrn and for Rrn  given in Equations (7-4lb) and (7-44).  7-13. Figure P7-1 show
s a simple circuit consisting of a voltage source. two resistors. and  two reactances in series with each other. If the resistor RL is allowed to vary but all  the other components are constant. at what value of RL will the maximum possible  power be supplied to it? Prove your answer. (Hint: Derive an expression for load  power in terms of V. Rs. Xs. RL• and XL and take the partial derivative of that ex­ pression with respect to Rd Use this result to derive the expression for the pullout  torque
 [Equation (7-54)].  jXs  v(Z)  FlGU RE 1'7-1  Circuit for Problem 7- 13.  7-14. A 440-V. 50-H z, two-pole, V-connected induction motor is rated at 75 kW. The  equivalent circuit parameters are  R[ = 0.075 0  X[ = 0.170  P FAW = 1.0 kW  For a slip of 0.04, find  R 2 = 0.065 n  X 2 = O.170  Pmioc = 150W  XM = 7.20  P axe = 1.1 kW  470 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (a) The line clUTent h  (b) The stator power factor  (c) The rotor power factor  (d) The stator copper losses P SCL  (e) The air-ga
p power PAG  (j) The power converted from electrical to mechanical fonn P OO/IiY  (g) The induced torque 7; ...  (h) The load torque Tlood  (i) The overall machine efficiency 71  OJ The motor speed in revolutions per minute and radians per second  7-15. For the motor in Problem 7-14, what is the pullout torque? What is the slip at the  pullout torque? What is the rotor speed at the pullout torque?  7-16. If the motor in Problem 7-14 is to be driven from a 440-V, 60-Hz power supply,  what will th
e pullout torque be? What will the slip be at pullout?  7-17. Plot the following quantities for the motor in Problem 7-14 as slip varies from 0 to  10 percent: (a) Tind: (b) P OOGY : (c) P 00': (d) efficiency 71. At what slip does P 00i. equal  the rated power of the machine?  7-18. A 20S-V, 60 H z six-pole, V-connected, 25-hp design class B induction motor is  tested in the laboratory, with the following results:  N o load:  Locked rotor:  OC test:  208 V, 22.0 A, 1200 W, 60 H z  24.6 V, 64.5 A
, 2200 W, 15 Hz  13.5 V, 64 A  Find the equivalent circuit of this motor, and plot its torque-speed characteristic  curve.  7-19. A 460-V, four-pole, 50-hp, 60-H z, Y-colUlected, three-phase induction motor devel­ ops its full-load induced torque at 3.S percent slip when operating at 60 H z and 460  V. The per-phase circuit model impedances of the motor are  RI = 0.33 n  XI = 0.42 n  XM =30 n  X2 = 0.42 n  M echanical, core, and stray losses may be neglected in this problem.  (a) Find the value 
of the rotor resistance R2.  (b) Find TmalI , s"""v and the rotor speed at maximum torque for this motor.  (c) Find the starting torque of this motor.  (d) What code letter factor should be assigned to this motor?  7-20. Answer the following questions about the motor in Problem 7-19.  (a) If this motor is started from a 460-V infinite bus, how much current will flow in  the motor at starting?  (b) If transmission line with an impedance of 0.35 + jO.25 n per phase is used to  connect the inductio
n motor to the infinite bus, what will the starting current of  the motor be? What will the motor's tenninal voltage be on starting?  (c) If an ideal 1.4: I step-down autotransformer is connected between the transmis­ sion line and the motor, what will the ClUTent be in the transmission line during  starting? What will the voltage be at the motor end of the transmission line dur­ ing starting?  INDU CT ION MOTORS 471  7-21. In this chapter. we learned that a step-down autotransformer could be us
ed to reduce  the starting current drawn by an induction motor. While this technique works. an au­ totransfonner is relatively expensive. A much less expensive way to reduce the start­ ing current is to use a device called y-~ starter. If an induction motor is nonnally  ~-cOIUlected. it is possible to reduce its phase voltage V. (and hence its starting cur­ rent) by simply reconnecting the swtor windings in Y during starting. and then  restoring the cOlUlections to ~ when the motor come s up to 
s~ed. Answer the fol­ lowing questions about this type of starter.  (a) H ow would the phase voltage at starting compare with the phase voltage under  normal lUlUling conditions?  (b) H ow would the starting current of the Y-colUlected motor compare to the start­ ing current if the motor remained in a ~-connection during starting?  7-22. A 460-V. lOO-hp. four-pole. ~-connected. 60-H z. three-phase induction motor has a  full-load slip of 5 percent. an efficiency of 92 percent. and a power factor
 of 0.87  lagging. At start-up. the motor develops 1.9 times the full-load torque but draws 7.5  times the rated current at the rated voltage. This motor is to be started with an auto­ transformer reduced-volwge starter.  (a) What should the output volwge of the starter circuit be to reduce the starting  torque until it equals the rated torque of the motor?  (b) What will the motor starting ClUTent and the current drawn from the supply be  at this voltage?  7-23. A wound-rotor induction motor is
 operating at rated voltage and frequency with its  slip rings shorted and with a load of about 25 percent of the rated value for the ma­ chine. If the rotor resistance of this machine is doubled by inserting external resis­ tors into the rotor circuit. explain what hap~ns to the following:  (a) Slip s  (b) M otor speed n ..  (c) The induced voltage in the rotor  (d) The rotor current  (e) "rio<!  (f) P out  (g) PRCL  (h) Overall efficiency 7f  7-24. An swer the following questions about a 460-V
, ~-COlUlected. two-pole. 75-hp. 60-H z.  starting-code-Ietter-E induction motor:  (a) What is the maximum current starting current that this machine 's controller  must be designed to handle?  (b) If the controller is designed to switch the stator windings from a ~ connection  to a Y connection during starting. what is the maximum starting current that the  controller mu st be designed to handle?  (c) If a 1.25: I step-down autotransfonner starter is used during starting. what is the  maximum s
tarting current that will be drawn from the line?  7-25. When it is necessary to stop an induction motor very rapidly. many induction motor  controllers reverse the direction of rotation of the magnetic fields by switching any  two stator leads. When the direction of rotation of the magnetic fields is reversed.  the motor develops an induced torque opposite to the current direction of rotation.  so it quickly stops and tries to start turning in the opposite direction. If power is re­ moved from 
the stator circuit at the moment when the rotor s~ed goes through zero.  472 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  then the motor has been stopped very rapidly. This technique for rapidly stopping an  induction motor is called plugging. The motor of Problem 7- 19 is running al rated  conditions and is to be stopped by plugging.  (a) What is the slip s before plugging?  (b) What is the frequency of the rotor before plugging?  (c) What is the induced torque "ria<! before plugging?  (d) What is the sl
ip s inunediately after sw itching the stator leads?  (e) What is the frequency of the rotor immediately after switching the stator leads?  (j) What is the induced torque "ria<! immediately after switching the stator leads?  REF E REN C E S  I. Alger. Phillip. Induction M achines. 2nd ed. N ew York: Gordon and B reach. 1970.  2. Del Toro. V. Electric Ma chines and Power Systems. En glewood Cliffs. N.J.: Prentice-H all.  1985.  3. Filzgerald. A. E. and C. Kingsley. Jr. Electric Ma chinery. N ew Y
ork: M cGraw-H ilt. 1952.  4. Filzgerald. A. E .• C. Kingsley. Jr .• and S. D. U mans. Electric Mac hinery. 51h ed. N ew York:  McGr aw-H ilt. 1990.  5. Institute of Electrical and Electronics En gineers. Standard Test P rocedure for Pol)phase  Induction M OlOrs and Genemtors. IEEE Standaro 112-1996. N ew York: IEEE. 1996.  6. K osow. Irving L. Control of Electric M otors. Englewood Cliffs. N.J.: Prentice-H all. 1972.  7. M cPherson. G eorge. An Introduction 10 Electrical Ma chines and Tmnsfonne
rs. N ew York:  Wiley. 1981.  8. National Eleclrical M anufaclurers Association. M OlOrs and GenemlOrs. Publication No. MG I- 1993. W ashington. D.C.: NEMA.I99 3.  9. Siemon. G. R .• and A. Siraughen. Electric M achines. Reading. Ma ss.: Addison-W esley. 1980.  10. Vithayalhil. Joseph. Pov.'ef E lectronics: P rinciples and App lications. N ew York: M cGraw- H ill.  1995.  II. W eminck. E. H . (ed.). Electric M OlOr Hand book. London: M cGraw- H ill. 1978.  CHAPTER  8  DC MACHINERY  FUNDAMENTALS 
 DC  ma chines are generators that convert m echanical energy to de electric  energy and m otors that convert de electric energy to m echanical energy.  Mo st de ma chines are like ac ma chines in that they have ac voltages and currents  within thern---dc ma chines have a de output only because a m echanism exists  that converts the internal ac voltages to de voltages at their tenninals. Since this  m echanism is called a commutat or, de ma chinery is also know n as commutating  machinery.  Th e
 fundamental principles invo lved in the operation of de ma chines are  very simple. Unf ortunately, they are usually som ew hat obscured by the compli­ cated construction of real ma chines. This chapter will first explain the principles  of de ma chine operation by using simple examples and then consider some of the  complications that occur in real dc ma chines.  S.I A SIMPLE ROTATING LOOP BETWEEN  CURVED POLE FACES  Th e linear ma chine studied in Section 1.8 served as an introduction to basi
c ma­ chine behavior. Its response to loading and to changing ma gnetic fields closely re­ sembles the behavior of the real dc generators and motors that we will study in  Chapter 9. H oweve r, real generators and m otors do not mov e in a straight line­ they rotate. The next step towa rd understanding real dc ma chines is to study the  simplest possible example of a rotating ma chine.  The simplest possible rotating dc ma chine is show n in Figure 8-1. It consists  of a si ngle loop of wire rot
ating about a fixed axis. The rotating part of this ma­ chine is called the rotor, and the stationary part is called the stator. TIle ma gnetic  473  474 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  d  N  s  (.)  N s  r-= >s  - f:::: = '-- - ~  - ~  - f-- - 0 '  < b  .. -( ): .  •  d "  • " ',.  (b) «)  F"  s  • ,  N F  "  (d)  ""GURE 8-1  A simple rotating loop between curved pole faces. (a) Perspective view; (b) view of field lines;  (e) top view; (d) front view.  OCMAC HI NERYFUNDAMENTALS 475  .. - "  •
  FIGU R E 8-2  Derivation of an equation for the voltages induced in the loop.  field for the ma chine is supplied by the ma gnetic north and south poles shown on  the stator in Figure 8- 1.  N otice that the loop of rotor wire lies in a slot carved in a ferroma gnetic  core. 1lle iron rotor, together with the curved shape of the pole faces, provides a  constant-width air gap between the rotor and stator. Remember from Chapter I that  the reluctance of air is mu ch mu ch higher than the rei uct
ance of the iron in the ma­ chine. To minimize the reluctance of the flux path through the ma chine, the ma g­ netic flux mu st take the shortest possible path through the air between the pole face  and the rotor surface.  Since the ma gnetic flux mu st take the shortest path through the air, it is per­ pendicular to the rotor surface everywhere under the pole faces. Also, since the air  gap is of unifonn width, the reluctance is the sam e everywhe re under the pole  faces. T he uniform reluctan
ce mean s that the ma gnetic flux density is constant  everywhere under the pole faces.  Th e Voltage Induced in a R otating L oop  If the rotor of this ma chine is rotated, a voltage will be induced in the wire loop.  To detennine the ma gnitude and shape of the voltage, examine Figure 8-2. 1lle  loop of wire shown is rectangular, with sides ab and cd perpendicular to the plane  of the page and with sides be and da parallel to the plane of the page. T he ma g­ netic field is constant and perpen
dicular to the surface of the rotor everywhere un­ der the pole faces and rapidly falls to zero beyond the edges of the poles.  To determine the total voltage e,OI on the loop, examine each segm ent of the  loop separately and sum all the resulting voltages. TIle voltage on each segment is  given by Equation (1-45):  eind = (v x B) • I (1-45)  476 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I. Segment abo In this segment, the velocity of the wire is tangential to the path  of rotation. Th e ma gnetic field
 8 points out perpendicular to the rotor surface  everywhere under the pole face and is. zero beyond the edges of the pole face.  Under the pole face, velocity v is perpendicular to 8 , and the quantity v x 8  points into the page. TIlerefore, the induced voltage on the segm ent is  positive into page under the pole face  beyond the pole edges (8-1)  2. Segment be. In this segment, the quantity v x 8 is either into or out of the  page, while length 1 is in the plane of the page, so v x 8 is perp
endicular to I.  Therefore the voltage in segment be will be zero:  ecb = 0 (8-2)  3. Segment ed. In this segment, the velocity of the wire is tangential to the path  of rotation. Th e ma gnetic field 8 points in perpendicular to the rotor surface  everywhere under the pole face and is. zero beyond the edges of the pole face.  Under the pole face, velocity v is perpendicular to 8 , and the quantity v x 8  points out of the page. 1llerefore, the induced voltage on the segment is  positive out of 
page under the pole face  beyond the pole edges (8-3)  4. Segment da. Just as in segment be, v x 8 is perpendicular to I. Therefore the  voltage in this segment will be zero too :  ead = 0 (8-4)  1lle total induced voltage on the loop ei!>d is given by  under the pole faces  beyond the pole edges (8-5)  Wh en the loop rotates through 180°, segm ent ab is under the north pole face in­ stead of the south pole face. At that time, the direction of the voltage on the seg­ ment reverses, but its ma gn
itude remains constant. Th e resulting voltage e,,,, is  shown as a function of time in Figure 8-3.  1llere is an alternative way to express Equation (8-5), which clearly relates  the behavior of the single loop to the behavior of larger, real dc ma chines. To de­ rive this alternative expression, examine Figure 8-4. N otice that the tangential ve­ locity v of the edges of the loop can be expressed as  v = rw  IX: MA C HINERY FUND A MENT ALS 477  2vBIC r----,  ,81  0 r-----~.------r------~------
T_------ ,  -vBI  -2vBI  FIGURE 8-3  Th e output voltage of the loop.  - v=rw  FIGURE 8-4  w  ,  Pole surface area  Ap .. nrl  •  R otor surface area  A =2nrl  Derivation of an alternative form of the induced voltage equation.  478 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  wh ere r is the radius from axis of rotation out to the edge of the loop and w is the  angular velocity of the loop. Substituting this expression into Equation (8-5) gives  _ [2rWBI  eioo - 0  eioo = {2r~BW  under the pole faces  beyo 
nd the pole edges  under the pole faces  beyo nd the pole edges  Notice also from Figure 8-4 that the rotor surface is a cylinder, so the area of  the rotor surface A is just equal to 2nrl. Since there are two poles, the area of the  rotor under each pole (ignoring the small gaps between poles) is Ap = nrl.  TIlerefore,  under the pole faces  beyond the pole edges  Since the nux density B is constant everywhere in the air gap under the pole faces,  the total flux under each pole is just the area
 of the pole times its flux density:  Th erefore, the final form of the voltage equation is  e., ~ {~"'W  '" 0  under the pole faces  beyond the pole edges (8-6)  TIm s, the voltage generated in the machine is equnl to the product of the  flux inside the mnchine and the speed of rotation of the machine, multiplied by a  constant representing the me chanical construction of the ma chine. In general, the  voltage in any real ma chine will depend on the same three factors:  I. Th e flux in the ma c
hine  2. Th e speed of rotation  3. A constant representing the construction of the ma chine  Getting DC Voltage out of the Rotating Loop  Figure 8-3 is a plot of the voltage e"", generated by the rotating loop. As shown ,  the voltage out of the loop is alternately a constant positive value and a constant  negative value. H ow can this ma chine be mad e to produce a dc voltage instead of  the ac voltage it now has?  One way to do this is shown in Figure 8-5a. H ere two semicircular conduct­ ing
 segm ents are added to the end of the loop, and two fixed contacts are set up at  an angle such that at the instant wh en the voltage in the loop is zero, the contacts  IX: MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS 479  N  Commutator  s  Brushes  (.)  -<'W  (b)  FIGU R E 8-S  Producing a dc output from the machine with a commutator and brushes. (a) Perspective view;  (b) the resulting output voltage.  short-circuit the two segm ents. In this fashion, every time the voltage of the loop  switches direction, the c
ontacts also switch connections, and the output of the con­ tacts is always built up in the same way (Figure 8-5b). T his connection-sw itching  process is know n as commutation. TIle rotating semicircular segments are called  commutator segments, and the fixed contacts are calJed brushes.  480 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  N  Commutator  s  (a)  Cu rrent into  cod page  N  ,...!..... Current out of page  F cJ, imd .......... :::J w, S  ~,Z,  "-b  (h)  ""GURE 8-6  Derivation of an equation fo
r the induced torque in the loop. Note that the iron core is not shown in  part b for clarity.  The Induced Torque in the Rotating Loop  Suppose a battery is now connected to the ma chine in Figure 8-5. The resulting  configuration is show n in Figure 8-6. H ow mu ch torque will be produced in the  loop when the sw itch is closed and a current is allowed to flow into it? To deter­ mine the torque, look at the close-up of the loop show n in Figure 8-6b.  TIle approach to take in detennining the t
orque on the loop is to look at one  segment of the loop at a time and then sum the effects of all the individual seg­ m ents. TIle force on a segm ent of the loop is given by Equation (1-43):  IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 481  F = i(lx8) (1-43)  and the torque on the segm ent is given by  T = rFsin () (1-6)  wh ere () is the angle between rand F. Th e torque is essentially zero wh enever the  loop is beyond the pole edges.  While the loop is under the pole faces, the torque is  I. Segmentab. I
n segm ent ab, the current from the battery is directed out of the  page. TIle ma gnetic field under the pole face is pointing radially out of the ro­ tor, so the force on the wire is given by  Fab- i(lx8)  - ilB tangent to direction of m otion  TIle torque on the rotor caused by this force is  "Tab - rF sin ()  - r(iIB) sin 900  - rilB CCW  (8-7)  (8-8)  2. Segment be. In segm ent be, the current from the battery is flowing from the  upper left to the lower right in the picture. Th e force indu
ced on the wire is  given by  Fbc - i(lx8)  - 0 since I is parallel to 8 (8-9)  TIlerefore,  "Tb< = 0 (8-10)  3. Segment ed. In segment ed, the current from the battery is directed into the  page. Th e ma gnetic field under the pole face is pointing radially into the ro­ tor, so the force on the wire is given by  Fed - i(l X 8 )  - ilB tangent to direction of motion  TIle torque on the rotor caused by this force is  "Ted - rF sin ()  - r(iIB) sin 900  - rilB CCW  (8-11)  (8-12)  4. Segment 00. I
n segment 00, the current from the battery is flowing from the  upper left to the lower right in the picture. Th e force induced on the wire is  given by  482 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Fda - i(I XB)  - 0 since I is parallel to B  Therefore,  Tdo = 0  TIle resulting total induced torque on the loop is given by  under the pole faces  beyond the pole edges  (8-13)  (8-14)  (8-15)  By using the facts that Ap ,., rrrl and cp = ApB , the torque expression can be re­ duced to  {, ~.  - ~,  Tind 
= :  under the pole faces  (8-16)  beyond the pole edges  TIlUS, the torque produced in the machine is the product of the flux in the  machine and the current in the machine, times som e quantity representing the m e­ chanical construction of the ma chine (the percentage of the rotor covered by pole  faces). In general, the torque in any real machine will depend on the sam e three  factors:  L The flux in the ma chine  2, The current in the ma chine  ), A constant representing the construction o
f the ma chine  Examp le 8-1. Figure 8--6 shows a simple rotating loop between curved pole faces  connected to a battery and a resistor through a switch. The resistor shown models the total  resistance of the battery and the wire in the machine. The physical dimensions and charac­ teristics of this machine are  r = O.5m  R = 0.3!l  VB = 120 V  I = 1.0m  B = O.25T  (a) What happens when the sw itch is closed?  (b) What is the machine's maximum starting current? What is its steady-state angu­ lar 
velocity at no load?  (c) Suppose a load is attached to the loop, and the resulting load torque is 10 N· m.  What would the new steady-state speed be? How much power is supplied to the  shaft of the machine ? H ow much power is being supplied by the battery? Is this  machine a motor or a generator?  IX: MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS 483  (d) Suppose the machine is again unloaded, and a torque of 7.5 N • m is applied to  the shaft in the direction of rotation. What is the new steady-state speed? Is th
is  machine now a motor or a generator?  (e) Suppo se the machine is rulUling unloaded. What would the final steady-state  speed of the rotor be if the flux density were reduced to 0.20 T?  Solution  (a) When the switch in Figure 8-6 is closed, a current will flow in the loop. Since  the loop is initially stationary, e jod = O. Therefore, the current will be given by  VB - eiod VB i = = R R  This current flows through the rotor loop, producing a torque  2.; 7iod = - 'I"  ~  ccw  This induced tor
que produces an angular acceleration in a counterclockwise di­ rection, so the rotor of the machine begins to turn. B ut as the rotor begins to  tum, an induced voltage is produced in the motor, given by  so the current i falls. As the current falls, 7ind = (2hr)cpi.t.. decreases, and the ma­ chine winds up in steady state with 7iod = 0, and the battery voltage VB = eind'  This is the same sort of starting behavior seen earlier in the linear dc machine.  (b) At starting conditions, the machine's
 current is  . VB l20V  I = J[ = 0.3fi = 400 A  At no-load steady-state conditions, the induced torque 7ind mu st be zero. But  7ind = 0 implies that current i must equal zero, since 7ind = (2hr)cpi, and the flux  is nonzero. The fact that i = 0 A mean s that the battery voltage VB = eind' There­ fore, the speed of the rotor is  _ VB _ ~  W - (2i1r)cp - 2rlB  l20V  = 2(0.5 mXI.O mXO.25 T ) = 480 rad/s  (c) If a load torque of 10 N om is applied to the shaft of the machine, it will begin  to slow
 down. But as w decreases, eind = (2hr)cpwJ. decreases and the rotor cur­ rent increases [i = (VB - eind.t.. )/R]. A s the rotor current increases, ITIOdI in­ creases too, until I 7;",,1 = 171Nd1 at a lower speed w.  At steady state, 171 .... 1 = 17indl = (2hr)cpi. Therefore,  . 7jod 7ind  1 = = --(2hr)cp 2rlB  ION om  = (2XO.5 m)(1.0 mXO.25 T) = 40 A  484 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  B y Kirchhoff's voltage law, eind = VB - iR, so  eiDd = 120 V - (40 A XO .3 ll) = 108 V  Finally, the speed
 of the shaft is  ejDd eiDd  w = (2/Tr)q, = 2rlB  108 V  = (2)(0.5 m X 1.0 m )(0.25 1) = 432 radls  The powe r supplied to the shaft is  P = T W  = (10 N • m X 432 rad/s) = 4320 W  The powe r out of the battery is  P = VBi = (120 V )(40A ) = 4800 W  This m achine is operating as a motor, converting electric powe r to m echanical  powe r.  (d) If a torque is applied in the direction of motion, the rotor accelerates. As the  speed increases, the internal voltage eind increases and exceeds Vs, so t
he current  flows out of the top of the bar and into the battery. This m achine is now a gen­ emtor. This current causes an induced torque opposite to the direction of mo­ tion. Th e induced torque opposes the external applied torque, and eventually  I11NdI = ITUldI at a higher speed w.  Th e current in the rotor w ill be  . 7ind Tim  I = (2hr)q, = 2rlB  7.5 N. m  = (2)(0.5 m X 1.0 m XO .25 T ) = 30 A  Th e induced voltage eind is  eind - VB + iR  - 120 V + (30 A XO .3 !l)  - 129 V  Finally, the
 speed of the shaft is  eiod eiDd  W = (2/Tr)q, = 2rlB  129 V  = (2X0.5 m)(1.0 m XO .25 T ) = 516 radls  (e) Since the m achine is initially lUlloaded at the original conditions, the speed w =  480 radls. If the flux decreases, there is a transient. H ow ever, after the transient  is over, the m achine mu st again have zero torque, since there is still no load on  its shaft. If"TIDd = 0, then the current in the rotor mu st be zero, and VB = eind. Th e  shaft speed is thus  eiod eiDd  w = (2/Tr)q
, = 2rlB  IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 485  120 V  = (2)(0.5 mX 1.0 m )(0.20 T ) = 600 rad/s  Notice that when the flux in the machine is decreased, its speed increases. This  is the same behavior seen in the linear machine and the same way that real dc  motors behave.  8.2 COMMUTATION IN A SIMPLE  FOUR-LOOP D C MACHINE  Commutation is the process of converting the ac voltages and currents in the rotor  of a dc ma chine to dc voltages and currents at its tenninals. It is the mo st critical  part o
f the design and operation of any dc ma chine. A m ore detailed study is nec­ essary to determine just how this conversion occurs and to discover the problem s  associated with it. In this section, the technique of commutation will be explained  for a ma chine m ore complex than the single rotating loop in Section 8.1 but less  complex than a real dc ma chine. Section 8.3 will continue this development and  explain commutation in real dc ma chines.  A simple four-loop, two-pole dc ma chine is sh
ow n in Figure 8-7.lllis ma­ chine has four complete loops buried in slots carved in the laminated steel of its  rotor. TIle pole faces of the ma chine are curved to provide a uniform air-gap width  and to give a uniform nux density everywhere under the faces.  The four loops of this ma chine are laid into the slots in a special manner.  The "unprimed" end of each loop is the outermost wire in each slot, while the  "primed" end of each loop is the innennost wire in the slot directly opposite. Th
 e  winding's connections to the ma chine's commutator are shown in Figure 8-7b.  N otice that loop 1 stretches between commutat or segm ents a and b, loop 2  stretches between segments band c, and so forth around the rotor .  •  N s  d  (.J  FIGURE 8-7  (a) A four-toop two-pole dc machine shown at time WI = 0°. (continues)  486 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Back side of  coil I  Back side of  coil 4  3 I' 42'  S  Pol,  faces  Comrnutator_  segments -~- Brushes  ""GUR E 8-7 (roncluded)  3'
 24'  N  I' 2  ,  b  43'  (bl  Back side of coil 2  • ,  E=4~  B ack side of coil 3  3 ]' 42'  S  3' 24'  N  ("  (b) Th e voltages on the rotor conductors at this time, (c) A winding diagram of this machine showing  the interconnections of the rotor loops.  At the instant show n in Figure 8-7, the \,2,3', and 4' ends of the loops are  under the north pole face, while the \',2',3, and 4 ends of the loops are underthe  south pole face. TIle voltage in each of the 1,2,3', and 4' ends of the loops i
s  given by  eind - (v x B ) • I  positive out of page  (1-45)  (8-17)  TIle voltage in each of the 1 " 2', 3, and 4 ends of the ends of the loops is given by  - v BI positive into the page  (1-45)  (8-18)  IX: MA C HINERY FUND A MENT ALS 487  "  -----:7 ,,/ ·---,;..3,--__., • .;:"",::=.::45,-' __  I '  b  N  3'  I"  2 + e - I '  ov  ov  4' + e - Ib,  d  + e - 2'  ,  d  + e - 4  4 S  3  ov  ov  3'  E=2e  FIG URE 8-8  Th e same machine at time WI =  45°. showing the voltages on the  conductors.  
Th e overall result is show n in Figure 8-7b. In Figure 8-7b, each coil represents  one side (or conductor) of a loop. Irthe induced voltage on anyo ne side of a loop  is called e = vB I, then the total voltage at the brushes or tile m achine is  1£ -4, wt -O'I (8-19)  No tice that there are two parallel paths for current through the machine. The ex­ istence of two or more parallcl paths for rotor current is a comm on feature of all  commut ation schem es.  Wh at happens to the voltage E of the 
terminals as the rotor continues to  rotate? To fm d out, examine Figure 8-8. lllis figure shows the m achine at time  w t = 45°. A t that time, loops 1 and 3 have rotated into the gap betwee n the poles,  so the voltage across each of them is zero. Notice that at this instant the brushes  488 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  w  • - wl= 90°  "  3  ,  ~E~  N b  ~f-I  d s  "  2  The same machine at time WI = 90°, showing the voltages on the conductors.  of the ma chine are shorting out commutato
r segm ents ab and cd. T his happens  just at the time when the loops between these segm ents have 0 V across them, so  shorting out the segm ents creates no problem. At this time, only loops 2 and 4 are  under the pole faces, so the terminal voltage E is given by  I E ~ " (8-20)  Now let the rotor continue to turn through another 45°. TIle resulting situa­ tion is show n in Figure 8-9. H ere, the 1',2,3, and 4' ends of the loops are under  E. volts  5 ,  4 ,  3 ,  2 ,  ,  o °  FIGURE 8-10  '-' 
 45 ° 90 ° °  IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 489  ~  180 ° 225 ° 270 ° ° 315 360 °  wI  The resulting output voltage of the machine in Figure 8-7 .  the north pole face, and the I, 2', 3', and 4 ends of the loops are under the south  pole face. The voltages are still built up out of the page for the ends under the  north pole face and into the page for the ends under the south pole face. 1lle re­ sulting voltage diagram is shown in Figure 8-18b. There are now four voltage­ carrying ends in each p
arallel path through the ma chine, so the terminal voltage E  is given by  wt - 900 1 (8-21)  C ompare Figure 8-7 to Figure 8-9. N otice that the voltages on loops 1 and  3 have reversed between the two pictures. but since their connections have also  reversed, the total voltage is still being built up in the same direction as before.  This fact is at the heart of every commutation scheme. Wh enever the voltage re­ verses in a loop, the connections of the loop are also switched, and the total vo
lt­ age is still built up in the original direction.  Th e terminal voltage of this ma chine as a function of time is shown in Fig­ ure 8-10. It is a better approximation to a constant dc level than the single rotat­ ing loop in Section 8.1 produced. As the number of loops on the rotor increases,  the approximation to a perfect dc voltage continues to get better and better.  In summ ary,  Commutation is the process of switching the loop COIUlections on the rotor of a dc  machine just as the volt
age in the loop switches polarity, in order to maintain an es­ sentially constant dc output voltage.  A s in the case of the simple rotating loop, the rotating segm ents to which the  loops are attached are called commutator segments, and the stationary pieces that  ride on top of the mo ving segments are called brushes. Th e commutator segments  490 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  in real ma chines are typically mad e of copper bars. Th e brushes are mad e of a mix­ ture containing graphite, s
o that they cause very little friction as they rub over the  rotating commutator segments.  8.3 COMMUTATION AND ARMATURE  CONSTRUCTION IN REAL DC MACHINES  In real dc ma chines, there are several ways in which the loops on the rotor (also  called the armature) can be connected to its commutat or segm ents. nlese differ­ ent connections affect the number of parallel current paths within the rotor, the  output voltage of the rotor, and the numb er and position of the brushes riding on  the commuta
t or segments. We will now examine the construction of the coils on  a real dc rotor and then look at how they are connected to the commutator to pro­ duce a dc voltage.  The Rotor Coils  R egardless of the way in which the windings are connected to the commutator  segments, m ost of the rotor windings them selves consist of diamond-shaped  preformed coils which are inserted into the armature slots as a unit (see Figure  8-11). Each coil consists of a number of turns (loops) of wire, each turn t
aped and  insulated from the other turns and from the rotor slot. Each side of a turn is called  a conductor. 1lle number of conductors on a ma chine's annature is given by  where  I Z ~ 2eN c I  Z = number of conductors on rotor  C = number of coils on rotor  Nc = number of turns per coil  (8-22)  Nonnally, a coil spans 180 electrical degrees. nlis mean s that when one  side is under the center of a given ma gnetic pole, the other side is under the cen­ ter of a pole of opposite polarity. The p
hysical poles may not be located 180 m e­ chanical degrees apart, but the ma gnetic field has completely reversed its polarity  in traveling from under one pole to the next. Th e relationship between the electri­ cal angle and me chanical angle in a given ma chine is given by  where Oe = electrical angle, in degrees  0", = m echanical angle, in degrees  P = number of ma gnetic poles on the ma chine  (8-23)  If a coil spans 180 electrical degrees, the voltages in the conductors on either side  of
 the coil will be exactly the sam e in ma gnitude and opposite in direction at all  times. Such a coil is called afull-pitch coil.  Nc  turns  insulated  from  ,~h  other  FI GURE  8-11  OCMACHINERYFUNDAMENTALS  491  I",  length  of  conductor  (a)  (b)  (a) The shape  of  a typical prefornled rotor coil. (b) A typical coil insulation system showing the  insulation between turns within a coil.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  El ectric Company.)  Sometimes a co il  is built that spans less than 180 el ec t
rical degrees. Such a  co il  is  ca lled  afractional-pitch coil,  and a rotor winding wound with frac ti onal­ pitch co il s is  ca ll ed a  chorded winding.  1lle  amount of chording  in  a winding is  described by a  pitch factor p,  which is defined by the equation  el ec trical angle  of  coil  p  =  18 0 0  x 100% (8-24)  Sometimes a small amount  of  chording will be used in dc rotor windings to im­ prove commutatio n.  Mo st rotor windings are  hi!o-layer windings,  meaning that sides f
rom two  different coils are  in serted into each slo t.  One side  of  each co il  will be  at  the bot­ tom of its slot, and the other side will  be  at  the top of its slot. Such a construction  requires the individual coils to  be  placed  in  the rotor slots by a very elaborate   492  ELECTRIC  MACHINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  ,  \  •  ,  --- :.------ ""GURE  8- 12  The installation  of  prefonned rotor coils on a dc machine rotor.  (Courtesy  of  Westinghouse Electric  Company.)  procedure (see  F
i gu re  8-12).  One s id e  of  each of the co il s is placed in the bottom  of  it s slot, and  th en after a ll  th e bottom s id es are  in  place, the other s id e of each  co il  is placed  in  th e top  of  it s slo t.  In  this fashion, all  th e windings are woven to­ ge th er,  in creas in g the  me chanical streng th  and unifonnity  of  th e final s tru cture.  Connections to  the  Commutator  Segments  Once the windings are  in stalled  in  th e rotor slots,  th ey  mu st  be  co nn
 ected  to th e  commutator segments. The re  are a number  of  ways in which these connections  can  be  made , and the different winding arrangements which res ult  have different  advantages and disadvantages.  TIl e distance ( in  number  of  segm ents) between the commutator segments to  which the  tw o e nd s of a  co il  are co nn ected is ca ll ed  th e  commutator pitch  Ye .  If the  e nd  of a co il  (or a set number of co il s,  for wave cons tru c ti on) is co nn ected  to  a  commu
tat or segm e nt  ahead of the one  it s beginni ng is co nn ected t o,  th e winding  is ca ll ed  a  progressive w inding.  If  th e end  of  a co il  is connected to a commutator  segm e nt  behind  th e o ne  it s beginning is  co nnected t o,  the winding is ca ll ed a  re t­ rogressive winding.  If everything else is ide nti cal,  th e direction  of  rotation of a  progressive-wo und  rotor  will  be  oppos.ite to the direction  of  rotation  of  a  re trogressive-wo und  rotor.  Rotor (ar
mature) windings are further classified according  to th e  pl ex  of  their windings. A  simplex  rotor winding is a s in gl e,  complete, closed winding  wound on a rotor. A  duplex  rotor winding is a rotor with  two complete  and  inde­ pendent sets  of rotor  wi  ndings. I f a rotor  ha s a dupl ex  winding, then each  of  th e  windings  will  be  associated with eve ry  ot her commutator segment: On e winding   IX: MAC HINERY FUNDAMENTALS 493  c+ I c C+I C-I C C+I  I" Ib,  FIGU R E 8-13  
(3) A coil in 3 progressive rotor winding. (b) A coil in 3 retrogressive rotor winding.  will be connected to segments I, 3, 5, etc., and the other winding will be con­ nected to segm ents 2, 4, 6, etc. Similarly, a triplex winding will have three com­ plete and independent sets of windings, each winding connected to every third  commutator segm ent on the rotor. Collectively, all armatures with m ore than one  set of windings are said to have multiplex windings.  Finally, annature windings are 
classified according to the sequence of their  connections to the commutator segments. T here are two basic sequences of arrna­ ture winding connections-iap windings and wave windings. In addition, there is  a third type of winding, called a frog-leg winding, which combines lap and wave  windings on a single rotor. T hese windings will be examined individually below,  and their advantages and disadvantages will be discussed.  Th e L ap W inding  T he simplest type of winding construction used in
 m odem dc ma chines is the sim­ plex series or lap winding. A simplex lap winding is a rotor winding consisting of  coils containing one or more turns of wire with the two ends of each coil coming  out at adjacent commutator segments (Figure 8- 13). If the end of the coil is con­ nected to the segment after the segment that the beginning of the coil is connected  to, the winding is a progressive lap winding and Yc = I; if the end of the coil is  connected to the segment before the segment that 
the beginning of the coil is con­ nected to, the winding is a retrogressive lap winding and Yc = - I. A simple two­ pole ma chine with lap windings is show n in Figure 8- 14.  An interesting feature of simplex lap windings is that there are as many par­ allel current paths through the machine as there are poles on the mnchine. If C is  the numb er of coils and commutat or segments present in the rotor and P is the  494 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  2  N  I-oo--J s  \  8 5  ""GURE 8-14  A simp
le two-pole lap-wound dc machine.  number of poles on the ma chine, then there will be c/P coils in each of the P par­ allel current paths through the ma chine. The fact thai there are P current paths also  requires that there be as man y brushes on the ma chine as there are poles in order  to tap all the current paths. This idea is illustrated by the simple four-pole m otor  in Figure 8-15. N otice that, for this motor, there are four current paths through the  rotor, each having an equal volta
ge. Th e fact that there are many current paths in  a multi pole ma chine mak es the lap winding an ideal choice for fairly low-vo ltage,  high-current ma chines, since the high currents required can be split among the  several different current paths. This current splitting pennits the size of individual  rotor conductors to remain reasonable even when the total current becomes ex­ tremely large.  TIle fact that there are many parallel paths through a multipole lap-wound  ma chine can lead to a
 serious problem, however. To understand the nature of this  problem, examine the six-pole ma chine in Figure 8-16. Because of long usage,  there has been slight wear on the bearings of this ma chine, and the lower wires are  closer to their pole faces than the upper wires are. As a result, there is a larger volt­ age in the current paths involving wires under the lower pole faces than in the paths  involving wires under the upper pole faces. Since all the paths are connected in par­ allel, the 
result will be a circulating current flow ing out som e of the brushes in the  ma chine and back into others, as show n in Figure 8-17. N eedless to say, this is not  gooj for the machine. Since the winding resistance of a rotor circuit is so small, a  very tiny imbalance runong the voltages in the parallel paths will cause large cir­ culating currents through the brushes and potentially serious heating problems.  TIle problem of circulating currents within the parallel paths of a ma chine  with
 four or more poles can never be entirely resolved, but it can be reduced  somewhat by equalizers or equalizing windings. Equalizers are bars located on the  rotor of a lap-wound dc ma chine that short together points at the sam e voltage  N  N  lit·  " " "  "  "  I 13 2 14 3 IS  ,16y  IXX'>:  yP ,  F IG U R E 8-15  16  s  41651 ' 62'7  XXx  6 , d ,  IX: MA C HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS 495  s  4 s  N  IOL-__  II  13 12  s  ,.,  ;x ;X  N  " " " "  "  " 3' 8 4 ' 9 5' 10 6 ' 117' I  ;X  :xxx :xxx  8 h
  ,b,  s  ,- i­ "  " " N  "  " I  8' 139 '1410 151116~ 13'  ;:xxx :X14·  • m '~  (a) A four-pole lap-wound de motor. (b) The rotor winding diagram of this machine. N otice that each  winding ends on the commutator segment just after the one it begins at. This is a progressive lap  winding.  496 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  s  N N  s s  N  ""GURE 8-16  A six-pole dc motor showing the effects of bearing wear. Notice that the rotor is slightly closer to the  lower poles than it is to the upper 
poles.  level in the different parallel paths. Th e effect of this shorting is 10 cause any cir­ culating currents that occur to now inside the small sections of windings thus  shorted together and to prevent this circulating current from flowing through the  brushes of the ma chine. TIlese circulating currents even partially correct the flux  imbalance that caused them to exist in the first place. An equalizer for the four­ pole ma chine in Figure 8-15 is shown in Figure 8-18, and an equalizer 
for a large  lap-wound dc ma chine is shown in Figure 8-19.  If a lap winding is duplex, then there are two completely independent wind­ ings wrapped on the rotor, and every other commutat or segment is tied to one of  the sets. The refore, an individual coil ends on the second commutat or segment  down from where it started, and Yc = ~2 (depending on wh ether the winding is  progressive or retrogressive). Since each set of windings has as man y current  paths as the ma chine has poles, there ar
e twice as many current paths as the ma­ chine has poles in a duplex lap winding.  In general, for an m-plex lap winding, the commutator pitch Yc is  lap winding (8-25)  and the number of current paths in a ma chine is  I a -m pl lap winding (8-26)  v,  IX: MA C HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS 497  Cirwlating Current  +  .l. .l. ...  + + + + +  , , , " "  - - - - - + + + + +  , , , " "  - - - - - + + + + +  , , , " "  - - - - - + + + + +  , , , " "  - - - - - + + + + +  , , , " "  - - - - - T T T - e+ s
lightly greater voltage  e- slightly lower voltage  FIGU R E 8-17  The voltages on the rotor conductors of the mach ine in Figure 8--16 are unequal. producing  circulating currents flowing through its brushes.  w here a = num ber of current paths in the rotor  m = plex of the w indings (I, 2, 3, etc.)  P = numb er of poles on the m achine  Th e Wa ve Windin g  +  +  +  +  +  T he series or w ave w inding is an alternative way to connect the rotor coils to the  commut ator segm ents. Figure 8-20 
shows a sim ple four-pole m achine w ith a  498 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  Equ alizer bars  1 ?< > X  ------ ------ Ii I  r-------I  " " "  N  I: I  , I: I  N  ':1  , II N  " " "  II  1 13 2 14 3 5 4 6 5 I' 6::k 7 3' 8 4' 9 5' 10 6' II 7' 1 8' 13 9' 14 10 15~1612  XXX >< >< X XX< x,;x X x,;x x,;x >x: ><  f'""" 'h ' "m"~  +  ~ + +  6' , , ,  - - + +  6 , " ,  - - + +  " , 8 ,  - - + + , , 8' ,  v, - - + +  4' , 9 ,  - - + +  4 , " ,  - - + + ,- , 10 ,  - - + +  3 , 10' ,  - - ~ - ""G
U R E 8-18  ,,)  +  '" ,  - +  14 ,  - Equa lizers +  13' ,  - +  13 ,  - +  12' ,  - +  12 ,  - Equa lizers +  11' ,  - +  11 ,  - (b)  B =h  "  W  16  16'  ,  , '  2  ,- B =h  + ,  + ,  + ,  + ,  + ,  + ,  + ,  + ,  (a) An equalizer connection for the four-pole machine in Figure 8--15. (b) A voltage diagram for the  ma chine show s the points shoned by the equalizers.  s  2  "  ,  b  +  N  •  .-0  .1. - ,  h  7  s  FIG U R E  8- 10  A simple four-pole wave-wound dc machine.  IX:  MA C HI NERY 
 FUND A MENT ALS  499  Fl G U R E  8- 19  A closeup  of  the commutator  of  a  large lap-wound  de  machine.  Th e  equalizers are moumed  in  the  smaIl ring just  in  front  of  the  commutator segments.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  N   500 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  simplex wave winding. In this simplex wave winding, every other rotor coil con­ nects back to a commutator segm ent adjacent to the beginning of the first coil.  TIlerefore, there are two coils in series betwee
n the adjacent commutat or seg­ m ents. Furthennore, since each pair of coils between adjacent segments has a side  under each pole face, all output voltages are the sum of the effects of every pole,  and there can be no voltage imbalances.  TIle lead from the second coil may be connected to the segm ent either ahead  of or behind the segment at which the first coil begins. If the second coil is con­ nected to the segment ahead of the first coil, the winding is progressive; if it is  connected t
o the segment behind the first coil, it is retrogressive.  I n general, if there are P poles on the ma chine, then there are PI2 coils in se­ ries between adjacent commutator segm ents. If the (PI2)th coi I is connected to the  segment ahead of the first coil, the winding is progressive. If the (PI2)th coil is  connected to the segment behind the first coil, the winding is retrogressive.  In a simplex wav e w inding, there are only two current paths. Th ere are c/2  or one-half of the windings i
n each current path. Th e brushes in such a ma chine  will be located a full pole pitch apart from each other.  What is the commutator pitch for a wave winding? Fig ure 8-20 show s a  progressive nine-coil winding, and the end of a coil occurs five segment s down  from its starting point. In a retrogressive wav e winding, the end of the coil occurs  four segm ents down from its starting point. Therefore, the end of a coil in a fo ur­ pole wave winding mu st be connected just before or just after
 the point halfway  around the circle from its starting point.  TIle general expression for commutator pitch in any simplex wave winding is  simplex wave (8-27)  where C is the number of coils on the rotor and P is the number of poles on the  ma chine. Th e plus sign is associated with progressive windings, and the minu s  sign is associated with retrogressi ve wind ings. A simplex wave winding is shown  in Figure 8-2 1.  Since there are only two current paths through a simplex wave-wound rotor,
  only two brushes are needed to draw off the current. TIlis is because the segment s  undergoing commutation connect the points with equal voltage under all the pole  faces. M ore brushes can be added at points 180 electrical degrees apart if desired,  since they are at the sam e potential and are connected together by the wires un­ dergoing commutation in the ma chine. Extra brushes are usually added to a wave­ wound ma chine, even tho ugh they are not necessary, because they reduce the  amoun
t of current that mu st be drawn through a given brush set.  Wav e windings are well suited to building higher-voltage dc ma chines,  since the numb er of coils in series between commutator segm ents pennits a high  voltage to be built up m ore easily than with lap windings.  A multiplex wave winding is a winding with multiple independent sets of  wave windings on the rotor. Th ese extra sets of windings have two current paths  each, so the number of current paths on a multiplex wave winding is 
 IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 501  8 9 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2  9 7' 1 8' 2 9' 3 I' 4 2' 5 3' 6 4 7 5' 8 6' 9 7' 1 8' 2 9'  d ,  FIGURE 8-21  Th e rotor winding diagram for the machine in figure 8-20. Notice that the end of every second coil in  series connects to the segment after the beginning of the first coil. This is a progressive wave winding.  I a - 2m I rnul1iplex wave (8-28)  The Frog-Leg Winding  Th efrog-leg winding or self-equaliZing winding gets its nam e from the shape of  its coils, as
 show n in Figure 8-22. It consists of a lap winding and a wave wind­ ing combined.  Th e equalizers in an ordinary lap winding are connected at points of equal  voltage on the windings. Wave windings reach between points of essentially equal  vol1age under successive pole faces of the same polarity, which are the same lo­ cations that equalizers tie together. A frog-leg or self-equalizing winding com­ bines a lap winding with a wave winding, so that the wave windings can function  as equalizers
 for the lap winding.  Th e numb er of current paths present in a frog-leg winding is  I a - 'Pm,." I frog-leg winding (8-29)  w here P is the number of poles on the machine and m Jap is the plex of the lap  winding.  EXIllllpie 8-2. Describe the rotor winding arrangement of the four-loop machine  in Section 8.2.  Solutioll  Th e machine described in Section 8.2 has four coils. each containing one turn. resulting in  a total of eight conductors. It has a progressive lap winding.  502 ELECTRIC M 
AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Coil  ~~r,~  W ·d· / ave Win lOgS  FlGU RE 8-22  A frog-leg or self-equalizing winding coil.  8.4 PROBLEMS WITH COMMUTATION IN  REAL MACHINES  TIle commutation process as described in Sections 8.2 and 8.3 is not as simple in  practice as it seem s in theory, because two major effects occur in the real wor ld to  disturb it:  L Annature reaction  2, L dildt voltages  TIlis section explores the nature of these problems and the sol utions emp loyed to  mitigate their effects
.  Annature Reaction  If the ma gnetic field windings of a dc ma chine are connected to a power supply  and the rotor of the ma chine is turned by an external source of mechanical power,  then a voltage will be induced in the cond uctors of the rotor. This voltage wil I be  rectified into a dc output by the action of the ma chine's commutat or.  Now connect a load to the tenninaIs of the ma chine, and a current will flow  in its armature windings. TIlis current flow wi ll produce a ma gnetic fie
ld of its  ow n, which will distort the original ma gnetic field from the ma chine's poles. TIlis  distortion of the flux in a ma chine as the load is increased is called armature re­ action. It causes two serious problems in real dc ma chines.  TIle first problem caused by annature reaction is neutral-plane shift. Th e  mng netic neutral plane is defined as the plane within the ma chine where the  N  IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 503  M agnetic neutral plane  ;:,w-I--_  N ew neutral plane w Old
 neutral plane  y-t--- (b) 0  " w N 0  "  S ~  0  "  0  "  N 0  "  S ( .)  o  (,)  FIGU RE 8-23  Th e development of annature reaction in a dc gelJerator. (a) Initially the pole flux is unifonnly  distributed. and the magnetic neutral plane is vertical; (b) the effect of the air gap on the pole flux  distribution; (c) the armature magnetic field resulting when a load is connected to the machine;  (d) both rotor and pole fluxes are shown. indicating points where they add and subtract; (e) the  re
sulting flux under the poles. The neutral plane has shifted in the direction of motion.  velocity of the rotor wires is exactly parallel to the ma gnetic nux lines, so that eind  in the conductors in the plane is exactly zero.  To understand the problem of neutral-plane shift, exrunine Figure 8-23. Fig­ ure 8-23a shows a two-pole dc ma chine. N otice that the nux is distributed uni­ fonnly under the pole faces. Th e rotor windings show n have voltages built up out  of the page for wires under th
e north pole face and into the page for wires under  the south pole face. The neutral plane in this machine is exactly vertical.  N ow suppose a load is connected to this ma chine so that it acts as a genera­ tor. Current will now out of the positive terminal of the generator, so current will  504 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  be flow ing out of the page for wires under the north pole face and into the page for  wires under the south pole face. This current flow produces a ma gnetic field fro
m  the rotor windings, as show n in Figure 8-23c. This rotor ma gnetic field affects the  original ma gnetic field from the poles that produced the generator's voltage in the  first place. In som e places under the pole surfaces, it subtracts from the pole flux,  and in other places it adds to the pole flux. Th e overall result is that the ma gnetic  flux in the air gap of the ma chine is skewed as show n in Figure 8-23d and e. N o­ tice that the place on the rotor where the induced voltage in a
 conductor would be  zero (the neutral plane) has shifted.  For the generator show n in Figure 8-23, the ma gnetic neutral plane shifted  in the direction of rotation. If this ma chine had been a m otor, the current in its ro­ tor would be reversed and the nux would bunch up in the opposite corners from  the bunches show n in the figure. As a result, the ma gnetic neutral plane would  shift the other way.  I n general, the neutral-plane shifts in the direction of m otion for a generator  and opp
osite to the direction of motion for a m otor. Furthennore, the amount of the  shift depends on the amount of rotor current and hence on the load of the ma chine.  So what's the big deal about neutral-plane shift? It's just this: Th e commu­ tator mu st short out commutator segm ents just at the mom ent when the voltage  across them is equal to zero. Ifthe brushes are set to short out conductors in the  vertical plane, then the voltage between segm ents is indeed zero until the machine  is loade
d. Wh en the ma chine is loaded, the neutral plane shifts, and the brushes  short out commutator segm ents with a finite voltage across them. Th e result is a  current now circulating between the shorted segments and large sparks at the  brushes when the current path is interrupted as the brush leaves a segm ent. Th e  end result is arcing and sparking at the brushes. TIlis is a very serious problem ,  since it leads to drastically reduced brush I ife, pitting of the commutator segments,  and gr
eatly increased maintenance costs. Notice that this problem cannot be fixed  even by placing the brushes over the full-load neutral plane, because then they  wou Id spark at no load.  In extreme cases, the neutral-plane shift can even lead to flashover in the  commutator segm ents near the brushes. Th e air near the brushes in a ma chine is  normally ionized as a result of the sparking on the brushes. Flashover occurs when  the voltage of adjacent commutat or segment s gets large enough to susta
in an arc  in the ionized air above them. If flashover occurs, the resulting arc can even m elt  the commutator's surface.  TIle second major problem caused by annature reaction is called flux weak­ ening. To understand flux weakening, refer to the ma gnetization curve show n in  Figure 8-24. M ost ma chines operate at flux densities near the saturation point.  TIlerefore, at locations on the pole surfaces where the rotor ma gnetom otive force  adds to the pole ma gnetom otive force, only a smal
l increase in nux occurs. But at  locations on the pole surfaces where the rotor ma gnetom otive force subtracts from  the pole ma gnetom otive force, there is a larger decrease in flux. 1lle net result is  that the total averageflux under the entire pole face is decreased (see Figure 8-25).  IX: MAC HI NERY FUND A MENT ALS 505  q,. Wb  , ,  •• , 1 , ,  .. , , ,  L-------------cf---}--~--------------- ~·A . tums  Pole mmf ,/ """  - annature Pole mmf Pole mmf + annature mmf  mmf  l1q,i - flux inc
rease under reinforced sections of poles  l1q,d - flux decrease under subtracting sections of poles  FIGU RE 8-24  A typical magnetization curve shows the effects of pole saturation where armature and pole  magnetomotive forces add.  Flux weakening causes problems in bolh generators and m otors. In genera­ tors, the effect of flux weakening is simply to reduce the voltage supplied by the  generator for any given load. In m otors, the effect can be m ore serious. As the early  examp les in this c
hapter showed, when the flux in a motor is decreased, its speed in­ creases. But increasing the speed of a m otor can increase its load, resulting in m ore  flux weakening. It is possible for some shunt dc m otors to reach a runaway condi­ tion as a result offlux weakening, where the speed of the m otor just keeps increas­ ing until the ma chine is disconnected from the power line or until it destroys itself.  L dildt Voltages  T he second major problem is the L dildt voltage that occurs in comm
utator seg­ m ents being shorted out by the brushes, som etimes called inductive kick. To un­ derstand this problem, look at Figure 8-26. T his figure represents a series of com­ mutator segments and the conductors connected between them. A ssuming that the  current in the brush is 400 A, the current in each path is 200 A. Notice that when  a commutator segm ent is shorted out, the current flow through that commutat or  506 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Stator  Field  § windings - S § N  / 
~ __ "'--'>. L-/ __ "'--'>.  1  Rotor  - M otion of generator  M fmotor ::f. A • turns - Oilon 0 Pole  - / magnetomotive force  -",  .............. ...............  "  -- ,  ............... , ................ , .  ,  Rotor  magnetomotive force  ...... ..--Net 9' '!f. A· turns  </>.Wb ... 1- Note: Saturation at pole tips  fo'IGUR E 8-25  --..........IP. Wb  /  Old  neutral  point  New neutral  poim  The flux and magoetomotive force under the pole faces in a de machine. At those points w here the 
 magnetomotive forces subtract. the flux closely follows the net magoetomotive force in the iron; but  at those points where the magnetomotive forces add, saturation limits the IOtal flux present. Note  also that the neutral point of the rotor has shifted.  segm ent mu st reverse. H ow fast mu st this reversal occur? A ssumin g that the ma­ chine is turning at 800 r/min and that there are 50 commutat or segments (a reason­ able numb er for a typical m otor), each commutator segm ent m oves under
 a brush  and clears it again in t = 0.00 15 s. 1l1erefore, the rate of change in current with re­ spect to time in the shorted loop mu st average  di 400 A  dt - 0.00 15 s - 266,667 A ls (8-30)  IX: MAC HINERY FUNDAMENTALS 507  -200 A  Direction of  commutator motion  200 A  -200 A  200 A  -?  200 A  (a)  1=0.0015 s  200 Ar----"  - -200 A 200 A  200 A 200 A  \ r-------i-~,"i------------ ,  Bru sh reaches  beginning of  segment b  , , , , , ,  ...--Spark at trailing  edge of brush  Brush clears 
 end of  segment a  ------ Ideal conunutation  200 A  - Actual commutation with inductance taken into account  (b)  FIGU R E 8-26  (a) The revel"S3.1 of current flow in a coil undergoing commutation. Note that the current in the coil  between segments a and b must reverse direction while the brush ShOMS together the two commutator  segments. (b) The current reversal in the coil undergoing commutation as a function of time for both  ideal commutation and real commutation. with the coil inductance
 taken into account.  With even a tiny inductance in the loop, a very significant inductive voltage kick  v = Ldildt will be induced in the shorted commutat or segment. T his high voltage  naturally causes sparking at the brushes of the machine, resulting in the same arc­ ing problems that the neutral-plane shift causes.  508 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Solutions to the Problem s with Commutation  TIlree approaches have been developed to partially or completely correct the prob­ lems of arm
ature reaction and L dildt voltages:  I. Brush shifting  2. Commutating poles or interpoles  3. Compensating windings  E:1.ch of these techniques is explained below, together with its advantages and dis­ advantages.  BRUSH SHIFT ING. Historically, the first attempts to improve the process of  commutation in real dc ma chines started with attempts to stop the sparking at the  brushes caused by the neutral-plane shifts and L dildt effects. Th e first approach  taken by ma chine designers was simpl
e: If the neutral plane of the ma chine shifts,  why not shift the brushes with it in order to stop the sparking? It certainly seemed  like a good idea, but there are several serious problems associated with it. For one  thing, the neutral plane m oves with every change in load, and the shift direction  reverses when the ma chine goes from m otor operation to generator operation.  lllerefore, som eone had to adjust the brushes every time the load on the ma chine  changed. In addition, shifting t
he brushes may have stopped the brush sparking,  but it actually aggravated the flux-weakening effect of the armature reaction in  the ma chine. TIlis is true because of two effects:  I. Th e rotor ma gnetom otive force now has a vector compon ent that opposes the  ma gnetom otive force from the poles (see Figure 8-27).  2. Th e change in annature current distribution causes the flux to bunch up even  m ore at the saturated parts of the pole faces.  Another slightly different approach som etimes
 taken was to fix the brushes  in a compromi se position (say, one that caused no sparking at two-thirds of full  load). In this case, the m otor sparked at no load and somewhat at full load, but if  it spent m ost of its life operating at about two-thirds of full load, then sparking  was minimized. Of course, such a ma chine could not be used as a generator at  ,II-the sparking would have been horrible.  By about 19 10, the brush-shifting approach to controlling sparki ng was al­ ready obsolete
. Today, brush shifting is only used in very small ma chines that al­ ways run as m otors. TIlis is done because better solutions to the problem are sim­ ply not economical in such small motors.  CO MMUTATIN G POLES OR INTERPOLES. Because of the disadvantages noted  above and especially because of the requirement that a person mu st adjust the  brush positions of ma chines as their loads change, another solution to the problem  of brush sparking was developed. TIle basic idea behind this new app
roach is that  N ew neutral plane B rushes  Jc---r::..;O~d neutral plane  o  N o  o  FIGURE 8-27  N et magnetomotive  force ::f ...  s  Rotor magnetomotive  force ::fR  (a)  IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 509  N  N ew neutral plane  Old neutral plane  ---f=---w  o  ~,  o  o  New net  magnetomotive ,  f_ "  (h)  s  Original net  I  magnetomotive  f=,  1 ,  : ::fR ,  (a) The net magnetomotive force in a dc machine with its brushes in the vertical plane. (b) The net  magnetomotive force in a dc mach
ine with its brushes over the shifted neutral plane. Notice that now  there is a component of armature magnetomotive force directly oppOiling the poles' magnetomotive  force. and the net magnetomotive force in the machine is reduced.  if the voltage in the wires undergoing commutation can be made zero, then there  will be no sparking at the brushes. To accomp lish this, small poles, called com­ mutating poles or interpoles, are placed midwa y between the main poles. Th ese  commutating poles are
 located directly over the conductors being commutated. B y  providing a flux from the commutating poles, the voltage in the coils undergoing  commutation can be exactly canceled. If the cancellation is exact, then there will  be no sparking at the brushes.  Th e commutating poles do not otherwise change the operation of the ma­ chine, because they are so small that they affect only the few conductors about to  undergo commutation. N otice that the armature reaction under the main pole faces  is
 unaffected, since the effects of the commutating poles do not extend that far. nlis  m eans that the flux weakening in the ma chine is unaffected by commutating poles.  H ow is cancellation of the voltage in the commutator segm ents accom­ plished for all values of loads? nlis is done by simply connecting the interpole  510 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  windings in series with the windings on the rotor, as show n in Figure 8-28. As the  load increases and the rotor current increases, the ma 
gnitude of the neutral-plane  shift and the size of the L dildt effects increase too. Both these effects increase the  voltage in the conductors undergoing commutation. H owever, the interpole flux  increases too, producing a larger voltage in the conductors that opposes the volt­ age due to the neutral-plane shift. Th e net result is that their effects cancel over a  broad range of loads. N ote that interpoles work for both m otor and generator op­ eration, since when the ma chine changes from 
m otor to generator, the current both  in its rotor and in its interpoles reverses direction. Th erefore, the voltage effects  from them still cancel.  What polarity mu st the flux in the interpoles be? Th e interpoles mu st induce  a voltage in the conductors undergoing commutation that is opposite to the voltage  caused by neutral-plane shift and L dildt effects. In the case of a generator, the neu­ tral plane shifts in the direction of rotation, meaning that the conductors undergoing  commuta
tion have the same polarity of voltage as the pole they just left (see Figure  8-29). To oppose this voltage, the interpolcs mu st have the opposite flux, which is  the flux of the upcoming pole. In a m otor, however, the neutral plane shifts opposite  to the direction of rotation, and the conductors undergoing commutation have the  sam e flux as the pole they are approaching. In order to oppose this voltage, the in­ terpoles mu st have the sam e polarity as the previous main pole. Th erefore,  
I. Th e interpoles mu st be of the sam e polarity as the next upcoming main pole  in a generator.  - v,  N s  R -----d+ -I,  ""GUR E 8-28  A de machine with imerpoles.  IX: MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS 511  2. The interpoles mu st be of the same polarity as the previous main pole in a  motor.  T he use of commutating poles or interpoles is very common , because they  correct the sparking problem s of dc ma chines at a fairly low cost. TIley are almost  always found in any dc ma chine of I hp or larg
er. It is important to realize,  though, that they do nothing for the flux distribution under the pole faces, so the  flux-weakening problem is still present. M ost medium-size, general-purpose m o­ tors correct for sparking problems with interpoles and just live with the flux­ weakening effects.  N  N ew neutral  plane  Now  neutral  plane  FIGU R E 8-29  u  s  n  (a)  (b)  Determining the required polarity of an interpole. Th e flux from the interpole must produce a voltage  that opposes the e
xisting voltage in the conductor.  512 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  --Rotor (amlature) flux - - - Aux from compensating windings  o , ,  " \ ,  N ' , ,  , ,  IS , ,  I  o  ,,'  N "  ""GURE 8-30  (, ,  o  ,b,  N eutral plane no/ shifted  with load  The effect of compensating windings in a dc machine. (a) The pole flux in the machine; (b) the  fluxes from the armature and compensating windings. Notice that they are equal and opposite;  (c) the net flux in the machine. which is just the origina
l pole flux.  , , , ,  COM PEN SAT ING WINDINGS. For very heavy, severe duty cycle m otors, the  flux-weakening problem can be very serious. To completely cancel armature re­ action and thus eliminate both neutral-plane shift and flux weakening, a different  technique was developed. This third technique involves placing compensating  windings in slots carved in the faces of the poles parallel to the rotor conductors,  to cancel the distorting effect of annature reaction. Th ese windings are conn
ected  in series with the rotor windings, so that wh enever the load changes in the rotor,  the current in the compen sating windings changes, too. Figure 8-30 shows the ba­ sic concept. In Figure 8-30a, the pole flux is show n by itself. In Figure 8-30b, the  rotor fl ux and the compen sating winding fl ux are show n. Figure 8-3Oc represents  the sum of these three fluxes, which is just equal to the original pole flux by itself.  Figure 8-3 \ shows a m ore careful development of the effect of c
ompen sat­ ing windings on a dc ma chine. N otice that the ma gnetom otive force due to the  IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 513  Stator  ~~~i"" - L---~ s------'>.~ L---~ N------'>.~  j ! !  Rotor ~~~ClIT0J:]0~· ~0c·IT0J:]6~. ~"[]"'iJ,,~®~~,,~,,~~  - Motionof  ::f,A· turns Pole magnetomotive force  Compensating  ,,(!"inding /~  /\ r-~ Rotor  genel1ltor  - Motion of  mmm  magnetomotiveforce '-_____ -':1..., =::fpole +::fR +::f""  ::f. A • turns  FIGURE 8-31  I  Neutral  plane  00'  shifted  :1..., =::
f pole  The flux and magnetomotive forces in a de mach ine with compensating windings.  compen sating windings is equal and opposite to the ma gnetom otive force due to  the rotor at every point under the pole faces. The resulting net ma gnetom otive  force is just the ma gnetomotive force due to the poles, so the flux in the ma chine  is unchanged regardless of the load on the ma chine. Th e stator of a large dc ma­ chine with compen sating windings is show n in Figure 8-32.  Th e major disadva
ntage of compen sating windings is that they are expen­ sive, since they mu st be ma chined into the faces of the poles. Any m otor that uses  them mu st also have interpoles, since compen sating windings do not cancel  L dildt effects. Th e interpoles do not have to be as strong, though, since they are  canceling only L dildt voltages in the windings, and not the voltages due to  neutral-plane shifting. Because of the expense of having both compen sating wind­ ings and interpoles on such a ma c
hine, these windings are used only where the ex­ tremely severe nature of a m otor's duty demands them.  514  ELECTRIC M AC HINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  ""GU R E 8-32  The stator  of  a six-pole dc machine with imerpoIes  and  compensating windings.  (Courtesy  of  Westinghouse Electric Company.)  8.5 THE INTERNAL GENERATED VOLTAGE  AND INDUCED TORQUE EQUATIONS OF  REAL  DC  MACHINES  H ow  mu ch  vo lt age is produced  by  a real dc ma c hin e? Th e induced  vo lt age  in  any  given ma c hin e depend
s on three factors:  I.  Th e flux  <p  in  the ma chine  2.  Th e speed  W  of  the ma c hin e's  rotor  3. A constant depending on the construction  of  the machine  H ow can the  vo lt age in the rotor windings  of  a real ma chine  be  detennined? Th e  vo lt age o ut  of  th e annature of a real ma chine is eq ual  to  the  number of co ndu ctors  per current path times the voltage on each conducto r.  Th e voltage  in  any single  conduct or  u nd er the pole faces  was previously show n t
o  be  eind  =  e  =  vB I  TIl e  vo lt age out  of  the annature of a real ma c hin e is thus  E  =  ZvBI  A  a  (8-3 1)  (8-32)   IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 515  where Z is the total number of conduct.ors and a is the number of current paths.  Th e velocity of each conductor in the rotor can be expressed as v = rw, wh ere r is  the radius of the rotor, so  E = ZrwBI  A a (8-33)  nlis voltage can be reexpressed in a m ore convenient form by noting that  the nux of a pole is equal to the nux de
nsity under the pole times the pole's area:  4> = BAp  Th e rotor of the ma chine is shaped like a cylinder, so its area is  A = 27frl (8-34)  I f there are P poles on the ma chine, then the portion of the area associated with  each pole is the total area A divided by the numb er of poles P:  A = A = 27frl  p P P (8-35)  Th e total flux per pole in the ma chine is thus  4> = BAp = B (27frl) = 27fr1B  p p (8-36)  lllerefore, the internal generated voltage in the ma chine can be expressed as  Fina
lly,  where  E _ ZrwBI  A- a (8-33)  (8-37)  (8-38)  (8-39)  In modern industrial practice, it is comm on to express the speed of a ma­ chine in revolutions per minute instead of radians per second. Th e conversion  from revolutions per minute to radians per second is  (8-40)  so the voltage equation with speed expressed in tenns of revolutions per minute is  516 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I E, ~ K'<I>" I (8-41)  where I K'= ~I (8-42)  H ow mu ch torque is induced in the annature of a real
 dc ma chine? The  torque in any dc ma chine depends on three factors:  I. Th e flux <p in the ma chine  2. The armature (or rotor) current I ... in the ma chine  3. A constant depending on the construction of the ma chine  H ow can the torque on the rotor of a real ma chine be determined? The  torque on the armature of a real ma chine is equal to the numb er of conductors Z  times the torque on each conductor. TIle torque in any single conductor under the  pole faces was previously show n to be
  (8-43)  If there are a current paths in the ma chine, then the total annature current I ... is  split among the a current paths, so the current in a single conductor is given by  I,  leo"" = a  and the torque in a single conductor on the m otor may be expressed as  dAIB  Tcood = - a- (8-44)  (8-45)  Since there are Z conductors, the total induced torque in a dc ma chine  rotor is  (8-46)  The flux per pole in this ma chine can be expressed as  J.. = BA = B (27rrD = 27rr1B  '+' p P P (8-47)  so
 the total induced torque can be reexpressed as  (8-48)  Finally,  I T ind = K<pIA I (8-49)  where I K = ~ I (8-39)  IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 517  B oth the internal generated voltage and the induced torque equations just  given are only approximations, because not alJ the conductors in the ma chine are  under the pole faces at any given time and also because the surfaces of each pole  do not cover an entire liP of the rotor's surface. To achieve greater accuracy, the  number of conductors und
er the pole faces could be used instead of the total num­ ber of conductors on the rotor.  Example &-3. A duplex lap-wound annature is used in a six-pole dc machine with  six brush sets. each spanning two conunutator segments. There are 72 coils on the arma­ ture, each containing 12 turns. The flux per pole in the machine is 0.039 Wb, and the ma­ chine spins at 400 r/min.  (a) H ow many current paths are there in this machine?  (b) What is its induced voltage EA ?  Solutioll  (a) The number of c
urrent paths in this machine is  a = mP = 2(6) = 12 current paths  (b) The induced voltage in the machine is  EA = K'qm  K' = ZP  60a  The number of conductors in this machine is  Z = 2CN c  = 2(72)(12) = 1728 conductors  Therefore, the constant K 'is  K' = ZP = (1728X6) = 144  60a (60XI2) .  and the voltage EA is  EA = K 'cpn  = (14.4)(0.039 Wb)(400 r/min)  = 224.6 V  (8--26)  (8-41)  (8-42)  (8-22)  EXllmple 8-4. A 12-pole dc generator has a simplex wave-wound annature con­ taining 144 coils o
f 10 turns each. The resistance of each turn is 0.011 n. Its flux per pole  is 0.05 Wb, and it is turning at a speed of 200 r/min.  (a) H ow many current paths are there in this machine?  (b) What is the induced annature voltage of this machine?  (c) What is the effective annature resistance of this machine?  (d) If a I-ill resistor is connected to the tenninals of this generator, what is the re­ sulting induced countertorque on the shaft of the machine? (Ignore the internal  annature resistance
 of the machine.)  518 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Solutio"  (a) There are a = 2m = 2 current paths in this winding.  (b) There are Z = 2CN c = 2(144X 10) = 2880 conductors on this generator's rotor.  Therefore,  K' = ZP = (2880XI2) = 288  60a (60)(2)  Therefore, the induced voltage is  E}, = K 'q>n  = (288XO .OS Wb)(200 r/min)  = 2880 V  (e) There are two parallel paths through the rotor of this machine, each one consist­ ing of 712 = 1440 conductors, or 720 turns. Therefore, the resistanc
e in each  current path is  Resistancelpath = (720 turnsXO.OII !lIturn) = 7.92 n  Since there are two parallel paths, the effective armature resistance is  R}, = 7.9; n = 3.96 n  (d) If a lOOO~ load is connected to the tenninals of the generator, and if R}, is ig­ nored, then a current of 1 = 2880 V/HXX) n = 2.88 A flows. The constant K is  given by  K = ZP = (2880)(12) = 2750:2  27TO" (27T)(2) .  Therefore, the countertorque on the shaft of the generator is  "Tind = Kt$/}, = (27S0.2XO.05 Wb )(2
.88 A)  = 396 Nom  8.6 THE CONSTRUCTION OF  DC MACHINES  A simplified sketch of a dc ma chine is shown in Figure 8-33, and a more detailed  cutaway diagram of a dc ma chine is show n in Figure 8-34.  TIle physical structure of the ma chine consists of two parts: the stator or sta­ tionary part and the rotor or rotating part. TIle stationary part of the ma chine con­ sists of the frame, which provides physical support, and the pole pieces, which  project inward and provide a path for the ma gneti
c flux in the ma chine. TIle ends  of the pole pieces that are near the rotor spread out over the rotor surface to dis­ tribute its flux evenly over the rotor surface. TIlese ends are called the pole shoes.  1lle exposed surface of a pole shoe is called a pole face, and the distance between  the pole face and the rotor is calJed the air gap.  IX:  MA C HINERY  FUND A MENT ALS  519  Field pole and  r.J "Oid  Nameplate  -+ --,'1--'<:.  Yoke  ----j '!- Frame  FI G URE  8-33  A simplified diagram  o
f  a  de  machine.  (a)  FI G URE  8-3 4  (a) A cutaway view  of  a  4O(X)..hp,  700,  V.  18-pole  de  machine showing compensating windings.  interpoles. equalizer. and commutator.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  (b) A cutaway view  of  a smaller four'pole de motor including interpoles but without compensating windings.  (Courtesy  of  MagneTek lncorpomted.)   520  ELECTRIC  MACHINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  TIlere are two principal windings on a  dc  ma chine: the annature windings  and  th 
e field windings. The  armature windings  are defined as  th e windings  in  which a voltage is induced, and the  field windings  are defined  as  the windings that  produce  th e main  ma gnetic flux  in  th e  ma chine.  In  a nonnal  dc  ma chine, the  annature windings are located on the rotor, and the  fi eld windings are located  on  th e stato r.  Be cause  th e annature windings are located on  th e rotor, a dc  ma c hin e's  rotor  it self is sometimes ca ll ed  an  armature.  Some  maj
 or features of typical  dc  motor cons tru ction are described  be l ow.  Pole and  Frame  Construction  TIle main poles  of  older  dc  ma chines were o ft en mad e  of  a single cast piece of  m etal, with  th e  fi eld windings wrapped around  it.  TIley often had bolted-on lami­ nated tips  to  reduce  co re losses  in  the pole faces. Since solid-state drive packages  have become co mm o n,  the main poles of new er  ma chines are mad e entirely of  laminated  mat e rial  (see  Fi gure  8-
35).  This is true because there is a  mu ch  hi gher  ac  content in the power supplied to  dc  m otors driven  by  so li d-state drive pack­ ages, resulting in  mu ch  hi gher eddy current losses in the stators  of  the  ma chines.  TIl e pole faces are typically either  chamfered  or  eccentric  in  co ns tru c ti on, m ea n­ in g that the outer tips of a pole face are spaced s li ghtly further from the rotor's  surface than the ce nt er of  th e pole  fa ce is (see  Fi gure  8-36).  This act
ion  in creases  th e  re lu ctance  at  th e  tip s of a pole face and therefore reduces the  flu x-b un c hin g e f­ fect of annature reaction on  the  ma chine.  ""GUR E 8- 35  M ain field pole assembly  for  a  de  motor. Note the pole laminations and compe nsating windings.  (Courtesy  of  General Electric Company.)   IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 521  Th e poles on dc ma chines are called salient poles, because they stick out  from the surface of the stator.  Th e interpoles in dc ma chines a
re located between the main poles. TIley are  more and m ore comm only of laminated construction, because of the sam e loss  problems that occur in the main poles.  Some manufa cturers are even constructing the portion of the frame that  serves as the ma gnetic flux's return path (the yoke) with laminations, to further re­ duce core losses in electronically driven motors.  Rotor or Armature Construction  Th e rotor or armature of a dc ma chine consists of a shaft ma chined from a steel  bar with
 a core built up over it. Th e core is comp osed of many laminations  stamped from a stccl plate, with notches along its outer surface to hold the arrna­ ture windings. TIle commutator is built onto the shaft of the rotor at one end of the  core. TIle annature coils are laid into the slots on the core, as described in Section  8.4, and their ends are connected to the commutator segm ents. A large dc ma chine  rotor is shown in Figure 8-37.  Commutator and Brushes  Th e commutat or in a dc ma chi
ne (Figure 8-38) is typically made of copper bars  insulated by a mica-type material. TIle copper bars are made sufficiently thick to  pennit normal wear over the lifetime of the motor. Th e mica insulation between  commutat or segments is harder than the commutator material itself, so as a ma­ chine ages, it is often necessary to undercut the commutator insulation to ensure  that it does not stick up above the level of the copper bars.  Th e brushes of the machine are mad e of carbon, graphite,
 metal graphite, or  a mixture of carbon and graphite. Th ey have a high conductivity to reduce elec­ tricallosses and a low coefficient of friction to reduce excessive wear. They are  N s  ,., ,b,  FIGURE 8-36  Poles with extra air-gap width at the tips to reduce armature reaction. (a) Chamfered poles;  (b) eccentric or uniformly graded poles.  s  522  ELECTRI C M AC HINERY  RJND A MENT ALS  ""G UR E 8-37  Photograph  of  a dc machine with the upper stator half removed shows the construction  o
f  its rotor.  (Courtesy  of  General Electric Company.)  ""G UR E 8-38  Close-up view  of  commutator and brushes  in  a large dc machine.  (Courtesy  of  General Electric  Company.)   IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 523  deliberately made of mu ch softer material than that of the commutat or segm ents,  so that the commutator surface will experience very little wear. The choice of  brush hardness is a compromi se: If the brushes are too soft, they will have to be  replaced too often; but if they
 are too hard, the commutator surface will wear ex­ cessively over the life of the ma chine.  All the wear that occurs on the commutator surface is a direct resu It of the  fact that the brushes mu st rub over them to convert the ac voltage in the rotor  wires to dc voltage at the ma chine's terminals. If the pressure of the brushes is too  great, both the brushes and commutator bars w ear excessively. H owever, if the  brush pressure is too small, the brushes tend to jump slightly and a great d
eal of  sparking occurs at the brush-comm utator segment interface. This sparking is  equally bad for the brushes and the commutat or surface. TIlerefore, the brush  pressure on the commutator surface mu st be carefully adjusted for maximum life.  Another factor which affects the wear on the brushes and segm ents in a dc  ma chine commutat or is the amount of current flowing in the ma chine. llle  brushes normally ride over the commutator surface on a thin oxide layer, which  lubricates the m ot
ion of the brush over the segm ents. H ow ever, if the current is  very small, that layer breaks down , and the friction between the brushes and the  commutat or is greatly increased. lllis increased friction contributes to rapid w ear.  For maximum brush life, a ma chine should be at least partially loaded all the time.  Winding Insulation  Other than the commutat or, the mo st critical part of a dc motor's design is the in­ sulation of its windings. I f the insulation of the m otor windings br
eaks down , the  m otor shorts out. The repair of a ma chine with shorted insulation is quite expen­ sive, if it is even possible. To prevent the insulation of the ma chine windings from  breaking down as a result of overheating, it is necessary to limit the temp erature  of the windings. This can be partially done by providing a cooling air circulation  over them, but ultimately the maximum winding temperature limits the maximum  power that can be supplied continuously by the ma chine.  Insulat
ion rarely fails from immediate breakdown at some critical tempera­ ture. Instead, the increase in temperature produces a gradual degradation of the in­ sulation, making it subject to failure due to another cause such as shock, vibration,  or electrical stress. Th ere is an old rule of thumb which says that the life ex­ pectancy of a m otor with a gi ven insulation is halved for each JO percent rise in  winding temp erature. This rule still applies to some extent today.  To standardize the tempe
rature limits of ma chine insulation, the National  Electrical Manuf acturers A ssociation (NEMA ) in the United States has defined a  series of insulation system classes. Each insulation system class specifies the max­ imum temperature rise permissible for each type of insulation. lllere are four stan­ dard NEMA insulation classes for integral-horsepower dc m otors: A, 8, F, and H.  Each class represents a higher pennissible winding temperature than the one before  it. For examp le, if the anna
ture winding temperature rise above ambient tempera­ ture in one type of continuously operating dc m otor is m easured by therm ometer,  524 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  it mu st be limited to 70°C for class A, WO °C for class B , \30°C for class F, and  ISSoC for class H insulation.  TIlese temperature specifications arc set out in great detail in NEMA Stan­ dard MG I -1993, Motors and Generators. Similar standards have been defined by  the International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC) an
d by various national stan­ dards organizations in other countries.  8.7 POWER FLOW AND LOSSES IN  DC MACHINES  DC generators take in me chanical power and produce electric power, while dc  m otors take in electric power and pnxluce me chanical power. In either case, not  all the power input to the ma chine appears in useful fonn at the other end-there  is always som e loss associated with the process.  TIle efficiency of a dc ma chine is defined by the equation  (8-50)  TIle difference between 
the input power and the output power of a ma chine is the  losses that occur inside it. Th erefore,  Poot - ~oss .,,= x 100% P;.o (8-51)  The Losses in DC Machine s  Th e losses that occur in dc ma chines can be divided into five basic categories:  I. Electrical or copper losses (llR losses)  2. Brush losses  3. Core losses  4. M echanical losses  5. Stray load losses  ELECTRICAL OR CO PPER LOSSES. Copper losses are the losses that occur in  the armature and field windings of the ma chine. TIle 
copper losses for the anna­ ture and field windings are given by  Armature loss:  Field loss:  where P), - annature loss  P F - field circuit loss  PA = li RA  PF = I}RF  (8-52)  (8-53)  IX: MACHINERY FUND A MENT ALS 525  I, - annature current  I, - field current  R, - annature resistance  R, - field resistance  Th e resistance used in these calculations is usually the winding resistance at nor­ mal operating temperature.  BRUSH LOSSES. 1lle brush drop loss is the pow er lost across the contact 
poten­ tial at the brushes of the ma chine. It is given by the equation  IpsD - VsDIA I  wh ere PBD = brush drop loss  VBD = brush voltage drop  IA = annature current  (8-54)  Th e reason that the brush losses are calculated in this manner is that the voltage  drop across a set of brushes is approximately constant over a large range ofarrna­ ture currents. Unless otherwise specified. the brush voltage drop is usually as­ sumed to be about 2 V.  CO RE LOSSES. The core losses are the hysteresis lo
sses and eddy current losses  occurring in the m etal of the motor. The se losses are described in Chapter 1. lllese  losses vary as the square of the flux density (B 2) and. for the rotor, as the 1.5th  power of the speed of rotation (nI.5).  1\"IECHANICAL LOSSES. 1lle m echanical losses in a dc ma chine are the losses  associated with me chanical effects. There are two basic types of me chanical  losses: friction and windage. Friction losses are losses caused by the friction of the  bearings i
n the ma chine, while windage losses are caused by the friction between  the m oving parts of the ma chine and the air inside the m otor's casing. Th ese  losses vary as the cube of the speed of rotation of the ma chine.  STRAY LOSSES (OR MISCELLANEOUS LOSSES ). Stray losses are losses that  cannot be placed in one of the previous categories. No matter how carefully losses  are accounted for, som e always escape incl usion in one of the above categories.  All such losses are lumped into stray lo
sses. For m ost ma chines, stray losses are  taken by convention to be I percent of full load.  The Power-Flow Diagram  One of the m ost convenient techniques for accounting for power losses in a ma­ chine is the power-flow diagram. A power-flow diagram for a dc generator is  shown in Figure 8-39a. In this figure, m echanical pow er is input into the ma chine,  526 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Stray  losses  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  M echanical  losses  EA IA '" iDd Ul m  I'R losses  ""GURE 8-39 
 Core  losses  p~  ,  Core  losses  ,,'  M echanical  losses  ,b,  I'R losses  Stray  losses  Pow er-flow diagrams for de machine: (a) generator: (b) motor.  and then the stray losses, me chanical losses, and core losses are subtracted. After  they have been subtracted, the remaining power is ideally converted from me ­ chanical to electrical fonn at the point labeled P"ODV . TIle me chanical power that is  converted is given by  I P"onv - T indw m I (8-55)  and the resulting electric power prod
uced is given by  (8-56)  H oweve r, this is not the power that appears at the ma chine's tenninals. Be­ fore the terminals are reached, the electricalllR losses and the brush losses mu st  be subtracted.  In the case of dc m otors, this power-now diagram is simply reversed. T he  pow er-now diagram for a m otor is show n in Figure 8-39b.  IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 527  Exampl e problems involving the calculation of motor and generator effi­ ciencies will be given in the next two chapters.  S.S
 SUMMARY  DC ma chines convert me chanical power to dc electric power, and vice versa. In  this chapter, the basic principles of dc ma chine operation were explained first by  looking at a simple linear ma chine and then by looking at a ma chine consisting of  a single rotating loop.  Th e concept of commutation as a technique for converting the ac voltage in  rotor conductors to a dc output was introduced, and its problems were explored.  Th e possible winding arrangements of conductors in a dc
 rotor (lap and wave  windings) were also examined.  Equations were then derived for the induced voltage and torque in a dc ma­ chine, and the physical construction of the ma chines was described. Finally, the  types of losses in the dc ma chine were described and related to its overall operat­ ing efficiency.  QUESTIONS  8-1, What is conunutation? H ow can a com mutator convert ac voltages on a machine's  armature to dc voltages at its terminals?  8-2, Why does curving the pole faces in a dc ma
chine contribute to a smoother dc output  voltage from it?  8-3, What is the pitch factor of a coil?  8-4, Explain the concept of electrical degrees. H ow is the electrical angle of the voltage  in a rotor conductor related to the m echanical angle of the machine's shaft?  8-5, What is conunutator pitch?  8-6, What is the plex of an armature winding?  8-7, H ow do lap windings differ from wave windings?  8-8, What are equalizers? Why are they needed on a lap-wound machine but not on a  wave-wolU
ld machine?  8-9, What is annature reaction? H ow does it affect the operation of a dc machine?  8-10, Explain the L dildt voltage problem in conductors lUldergoing commutation.  8-11, H ow does brush shifting affect the sparking problem in dc machines?  8-12, What are conunutating poles? H ow are they used?  8-13, What are compensating windings? What is their most serious disadvantage?  8-14, Why are laminated poles used in modem dc machine construction?  8-15, What is an insulation class?  8-1
6, What types of losses are present in a dc machine?  PROBLEMS  8-1, The following infonnation is given about the simple rotating loop shown in fig­ ure 8--6:  528 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  B = O.S T  l = O.5 m  r = O.I25 m  VB = 24 V  R = 0.40  w = 250 radls  (a) Is this m achine operating as a m otor or a generator? Explain.  (b) Wh at is the current i flow ing into or out of the m achine? Wh at is the powe r  flow ing into or out of the mac hine?  (c) If the speed of the rotor we
 re changed to 275 rad/s, w hat wo uld happen to the  current flow into or out of the m achine?  (d) If the speed of the rotor we re changed to 225 rad/s, w hat wo uld happen to the  current flow into or out of the m achine?  &-2. R efer to the simple two-po le eight-coil m achine show n in Figure PS- I. The follow­ ing inform ation is given about this m achine:  \ ~ad I  I __ wne __ ' , ,  , w ,  I .. I  ---------:::/~_~'',., - 5' -i/_-"'=:::--------- N  , , , I I , ,  I I  , , , , , I I , , , 
I I , , , I I ' , , , , ,  7""~-~-~-:=-~-~~8~.~,~O~6~.~5~~-~-~------,£~ 7  3 3' - ---- I 4 ----- ,  , I  I  , I  , I , , ,  , , , , ,  / 1': 5 \ , , ,  r----'-----"' I 20" I 20° I , , ,  , , , , , , ,  , ,  s  Given: II '" 1.0 T in the air gap  I '" 0.3 m (length of sides)  r '" 0.08 m (radius of coils)  n '" 1700 r!min  ----Lines on this side of rotor  - - - - L ines on other side of rotor  Jo'IGU R E 1'8-1  Th e machine in Problem 8-2.  IX: MACHINERY FUNDAMENTALS 529  B = 1.0T in air gap  1 = 
0.3 m (length of coil sides)  r = 0.08 m (radius of coils)  n = 1700 rlmin ccw  The resistance of each rotor coil is 0.04 n.  (a) Is the armature winding shown a progressive or retrogressive winding?  (b) H ow many current paths are there through the armature of this machine?  (c) What are the magnitude and the polarity of the voltage at the brushes in this  machine?  (d) What is the annature resistance RA of this machine?  (e) If a 1O~ resistor is connected to the tenninals of this machine, how
 much cur­ rent flows in the machine? Con sider the internal resistance of the machine in de­ tennining the current flow.  (f) What are the magnitude and the direction of the resulting induced torque?  (g) Assuming that the speed of rotation and magnetic flux density are constant, plot  the terminal voltage of this machine as a flUlction of the current drawn from it.  8-3. Prove that the equation for the induced voltage of a single simple rotating loop  2 ,., = - "'w In 7T '+' (8-6)  is just a s
pecial case of the general equation for induced voltage in a dc machine  (8--38)  8-4. A dc machine has eight poles and a rated current of 100 A. H ow much current will  flow in each path at rated conditions if the armature is (a) simplex lap-wound,  (b) duplex lap-wound, (c) simplex wave-wound?  8-5. H ow many parallel current paths will there be in the armature of a 12-pole machine  if the armature is (a) simplex lap-wolUld, (b) duplex wave-wound, (c) triplex lap­ wound, (d) quadruplex wave-wo
lUld?  8-6. The power converted from one fonn to another within a dc motor wa s given by  U se the equations for EA and "Tiod [Equations (8--38) and (8-49)] to prove that  EAtA = "Tiodw .. ; that is. prove that the electric power disappearing at the point of  power conversion is exactly equal to the mechanical power appearing at that point.  8-7. An eight-pole, 25-kW, 120-V dc generator has a duplex lap-wound armature which  has 64 coils with 16 turns per coil. Its rated speed is 2400 r/min.  (a
) H ow much flux per pole is required to produce the rated voltage in this genera- tor at no-load conditions?  (b) What is the current per path in the annature of this generator at the rated load?  (c) What is the induced torque in this machine at the rated load?  (d) H ow many brushes mu st this motor have? H ow wide mu st each one be?  (e) If the resistance of this winding is 0.011 0: per turn, what is the armature resis­ tance RA of this machine?  8-8. Figure PS-2 shows a small two-pole dc mo
tor with eight rotor coils and four turns  per coil. The flux per pole in this machine is 0.0125 Wh.  530 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  2 3  N s  ""GURE 1'8-2  The machine in Problem 8--8.  (a) If this motor is cOIUlected to a 12-V dc car battery, whal will the no-load speed  of the motor be?  (b) If the positive terminal of the battery is connected to the rightmost brush on the  motor, which way will it rotate?  (c) If this motor is loaded down so that it consrunes 50 W from the battery, wha
t  will the induced torque of the motor be? (Ignore any internal resistance in the  motor.)  &-9. Refer to the machine winding shown in Figure P8-3.  (a) H ow many parallel current paths are there through this annature winding?  (b) Where should the brushes be located on this machine for proper commutation?  H ow wide should they be?  (c) What is the plex of this machine?  (d) If the voltage on any single conductor lUlder the pole faces in this machine is e,  what is the voltage at the lenninals
 of this machine?  8-10. Describe in detail the winding of the machine shown in Figure PS-4. If a positive  voltage is applied to the brush under the north pole face, which way will this motor  rotate?  REFERENCES  I. Del Toro. V. Electric M achines and Pov.·er Systems. Englewood Cliffs. N.J.: Prentice-H a.lt. 1985.  2. Fitzgerald. A. E., C. Kingsley. Jr .. and S. D. Um ans. Electric M achinery. 5th ed. N ew York:  M cGraw- H ilt. 1990.  3. H ubert. Charles I. Preventative Maintenance of Electri
cal Equipment. 2nd ed. N ew York:  M cGraw- H ilt. 19ff}.  4. Ko sow. Irving L. Electric Ma chinery and Transfanners. En glewood Cliffs. N.J.: Premice-H atJ.  1972.  5. N a.tional Electrical M anufacturers Association. M otors and Generators, Publication MG 1-1993.  W ashington, D.C.. 1993.  6. Siskind. Charles. Direct Current Ma chinery. N ew York: M cGraw- H ilt. 1952.  7. Werninck. E. H . (ed.). Electric Motor Handbook.. London: M cGraw- H ilt. 1978.  IX: MAC HI NERY FUNDAMENTALS 531  9 10  8
 11  /  16' I 3'  7 I , I  / 12 , I /  -15' I , , I / - -- 6 I I g h 13  j  ,  N , I , , , , 6' 5 "  m , 14 , P  " " I  - / I , I --- / , - /  ,  8' I 11'  /  \0'/  3 16  2  ('1  :x ~~  :XXX  -- --- --, , , , ,  "  , N  , , , , , , , , , , , ,  --- --- ~  m  " " p "  b , d , f g h ; j , , m  "  (hI  FIGU R E P8-J  (a) Th e machine in Problem 8--9. (b) Th e annature winding diagram of this machine.  532 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ' __ 10  N s  14  2  ""GURE 1'8-4  The machine in Problem 8-
 10.  CHAPTER  9  DC MOTORS  AND  GENERATORS  D c m otors are de ma chines used as m otors, and de generators are de ma chines  used as generators. As noted in Chapter 8, the sam e physical ma chine can op­ erate as either a m otor or a generator-it is simply a question of the direction of  the power now through it. This chapter will examine the different types of de m o­ tors that can be made and explain the advantages and disadvantages of each. It  will include a discussion of de m otor starti
ng and solid-state controls. Finally, the  chapter will conclude with a discussion of de generators.  9.1 INTRODUCTION TO DC MOTORS  Th e earliest power system s in the United States were de system s, but by the 1890s  ac power systems were clearly winning out over de system s. Despite this fact, de  mot ors continued to be a significant fraction of the ma chinery purchased each  year through the 1960s (that fraction has declined in the last 40 years). Why were  dc m otors so comm on, when dc po
wer system s them selves were fairly rare?  Th ere were several reasons for the continued popularity of dc m otors. One  was that dc power system s are still comm on in cars, trucks, and aircraft. Wh en a  vehicle has a dc power system , it make s sense to consider using dc mot ors. An­ other application for dc mot ors was a situation in which wide variations in speed  are needed. Before the widespread use of power electronic rectifier-inverters, dc  m otors were unexcelled in speed control appl
ications. Ev en ifno dc power source  were available, solid-state rectifier and choppe r circuits were used to create the  necessary dc power, and dc motors were used to provide the desired speed control.  533  534  ELECTR IC M AC HI NERY  RJND A MENT ALS  ,.,  ,b,  ""G UR E 9-1  E arly de motors. (a) A very early  de  motor built by  El ihu Th ompson  in  1886.  It  was rated at about  \oj  hp.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  (b)  A larger four-pole de motor from about the turn  of  t
he century. N otice the h.andle for shifting the brush.es to the neutral plane.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company. )  (Today,  in duc ti on motors w ith so li d-state d ri ve  packages are  th e preferred choice  over dc m otors for m ost speed co nt rol app li ca ti ons. H oweve r, there are still som e  app li ca ti ons w here dc m otors are preferred.)  D C m otors are o ft en com pared  by  their speed reg ul a ti ons.  TIl e  speed regu­ lation  (S R )  of a m otor is de fin ed  by  'I
  S -R - ~ --: W~ " - '  Wn =~W~ " - X - l - ()() - % '1  W -l )   rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 535  I SR = nul ~ nfl x 100% I (9-2)  It is a rough mea sure of the shape of a m otor's torque-speed characteristic-a  positive speed regulation mean s that a motor's speed drops with increasing load,  and a negative speed regulation means a motor's speed increases with increasing  load. The ma gnitude of the speed regulation tells approximately how steep the  slope of the torque-speed curve is.  DC m oto
rs are, of course, driven from a dc power supply. Unless otherwise  specified, the input voltage to a de motor is assumed to be constant, because that  assumption simplifies the analysis of motors and the comparison between differ­ ent types of motors.  There are five major types of dc m otors in general use:  I. 1lle separately excited dc m otor  2. 1lle shunt dc m otor  3. 1lle pennanent-magnet dc m otor  4. 1lle series dc m otor  5. 1lle compound ed dc m otor  Each of these types will be exam
ined in turn.  9.2 T H E EQUIVALENT C IRCUIT  OFADC MOTO R  The equivalent circuit of a dc m otor is show n in Figure 9-2. In this figure, the ar­ mature circuit is represented by an ideal voltage source E), and a resistor R),. This  representation is really the Thevenin eq uivalent of the entire rotor structure, in­ cluding rotor coils, interpoles, and compen sating windings, if present. The brush  voltage drop is represented by a small battery V bru<h opposing the direction of cur­ rent flow i
n the ma chine. 1lle field coils, which produce the ma gnetic flux in the  generator, are represented by inductor LF and resistor RF. The separate resistor R odj  represents an external variable resistor used to control the amount of current in the  field circuit.  There are a few variations and si mplifications of this basic equivalent cir­ cuit. 1lle brush drop voltage is often only a very tiny fraction of the generated  voltage in a ma chine. Therefore, in cases where it is not too critical, 
the brush  drop voltage may be left out or approximately included in the value of R),. Also,  the internal resistance of the field coils is sometimes lumped together with the  variable resistor, and the total is called RF (see Figure 9-2b). A third variation is  that som e generators have m ore than one field coil, all of which will appear on the  equivalent circuit.  The internal generated voltage in this ma chine is given by the equation  (8-38)  536 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  --iJ:- V
~ I,  I 'VI/v ,  R,  E,  L,  (a)  R, I, _ A,  R,  + E,  L,  A,  ,b,  ""GU R E 9-2  (a) The equivalent circuit of a dc motor. (b) A simplified equivalent circuit eliminating the brush  voltage drop and combining R..., with the field resistance.  and the induced torque developed by the ma chine is given by  (8-49)  TIlese two equations, the Kirchhoff's voltage law equation of the annature circuit  and the ma chine's ma gnetization curve, are all the too ls necessary to analyze the  behavior and pe
rformance of a dc m otor.  9.3 THE MA G NETIZ A TION CU R V E  OF A DC M AC HINE  Th e internal generated voltage Ell of a dc m otor or generator is given by Equation  (8-38),  (8-38)  Th erefore, Ell is directly proportional to the nu x in the ma chine and the speed of  rotation of the ma chine. H ow is the internal generated voltage related to the field  current in the ma chine?  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 537  ~.Wb  '----------------3'. A· turns  FIGURE 9-3  The magnetization curve of a ferroma
gnetic material (4) versus 3').  "'="'0  n ="0 (constant)  '----------------IF [= ~; ]  FIGURE 9-4  The magnetization curve of a dc m achine expressed as a plot of E,t versus IF. for a fixed speed." ..  Th e field current in a dc ma chine produces a field ma gnetomotive force  given by '?} = NFIF. nlis ma gnetom otive force produces a flux in the ma chine in  accordance with its ma gnetization curve (Figure 9-3). Since the field current is di­ rectly proportional to the ma gnetom otive force and
 since EA is directly propor­ tional to the flux, it is customary to present the ma gnetization curve as a plot of EA  versus field current for a given speed Wo (Figure 9--4).  It is worth noting here that, to get the ma ximum possible power per pound  of weight out of a ma chine, m ost motors and generators are designed to operate  near the saturation point on the ma gnetization curve (at the knee of the curve).  This implies that a fairly large increase in field current is often necessary to g
et a  small increase in EA when operation is near full load.  Th e dc ma chine ma gnetization curves used in this book are also available in  electronic form to simplify the solution of problem s by MATLAB. Each ma gneti­ zation curve is stored in a separate MAT file. Each MAT file contains three  538 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  variables: if_va lues, containing the values of the field current; ea_values,  containing the corresponding val ues of E).; and n_O, containing the speed at which
  the ma gnetization curve was m easured in units of revolutions per minute.  9.4 SE PA R A TEL Y E X C ITE D A ND  SH UNT D C M O T O RS  TIle equivalent circuit of a separately excited dc m otor is show n in Figure 9-5a,  and the equivalent circuit of a shunt dc m otor is show n in Figure 9-5b. A sepa­ rately excited dc m otor is a m otor whose field circuit is supplied from a separate  I,  -+  R.,  R,  V,  L,  +  E,  ""GU R E 9-5  R,  Sometimes  lumped  together and  called RF  C )E,  V,  IF 
= -R,  V r= E). + lARA  lL=IA  R,  L umped  together and  called RF  V,  IF= RF  [  (a)  I,  - l,j  V r= EA + lARA  'bJ  I,  - R ...  R,  L,  I, I,  - -+  V,  +  V,  (a) The equivalent circuit of a separately excited dc lootor. (b) Th e equivalent circuit of a shunt  dc motor.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 539  constant-voltage pow er supply, while a shunt dc m otor is a motor whose field  circuit gets its powe r directly across the armature terminals of the m otor. Wh en  the supply voltage to a m 
otor is assumed constant, there is no practical difference  in behavior between these two ma chines. Unless otherwise specified, whenever  the behavior of a shunt m otor is described, the separately excited motor is  included, too.  T he Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL ) equation for the armature circuit of  these m otors is  (9-3)  Th e Terminal C haracteristic of a Shunt D C M otor  A tenninal characteristic of a ma chine is a plot of the ma chine's output quantities  versus each other. For a m o
tor, the output quantities are shaft torque and speed, so  the terminal characteristic of a m otor is a plot of its output torque versus speed.  H ow does a shunt dc mot or respond to a load? Suppose that the load on the  shaft of a shunt m otor is increased. T hen the load torque "Tlood will exceed the in­ duced torque "TiOO in the ma chine, and the motor wil I start to slow down. Wh en the  mot or slows down, its internal generated voltage drops (EA = K4>wJ. ), so the ar­ mature current in the
 m otor IA = (VT - EAJ.)/RA increases. As the annature current  rises, the induced torque in the m otor increases (1]00 = K4> IA i), and finally the in­ duced torque will equal the load torque at a lowe r mechanical speed of rotation w.  TIle output characteristic of a shunt dc motor can be derived from the in­ duced voltage and torque equations of the motor plus Kirchhoff's voltage law.  (KVL ) TIle KVL equation for a shunt m otor is  VT = EA + lARA  Th e induced voltage EA = K4>w, so  VT = K¢w
 + lARA  Since "Tind = K4>IA, current IA can be expressed as  "Tind  IA = K4>  Combining Equations (9-4) and (9-5) prOOuces  Finally, solving for the m otor's speed yields  (9-3)  (9-4)  (9-5)  (9-6)  (9-7)  This equation is just a straight line with a negative slope. TIle resulting  torque-speed characteristic of a shunt dc m otor is shown in Figure 9--6a.  540 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  "----------------------------'00  (a)  ------ WithAR  ---NoAR  "----------------------------'00 ,b, 
 ""GURE 9--6  (a) Torque-speed characteristic of a shunt or separately excited dc motor with compensating  windings to eliminate armature reaction. (b) Torque-speed characteristic of the motor with annature  reaction present.  II is important to realize that, in order for the speed of the motor to vary lin­ early with torque, the other terms in this expression mu st be constant as the load  changes. TIle tenninal voltage supplied by the dc power source is assumed to be  constant- if it is not co
nstant, then the voltage variations will affect the shape of  the torque-speed curve.  Another effect internal to the motor that can also affect the shape of the  torque-speed curve is armature reaction. If a motor has annature reaction, then as  its load increases, the flux-weakening effects reduce its flux. As Equation (9-7)  show s, the effect ofa reduction in flux is to increase the motor's speed at any given  load over the speed it w ould run at without armature reaction. Th e torque-speed 
 characteristic of a shunt m otor with annature reaction is shown in Figure 9--6b. If  a motor has compen sating windings, of course there will be no flux-weakening  problems in the ma chine, and the flux in the ma chine will be constant.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 541  " R, " - - +  0.060  R;). ~ I',  son  + R, <  ~  E, VT ",250V  L, N F '"  1200tuTns  FIGURE 9-7  The shunt motor in Example 9--1.  Ifa shunt dc m otor has compen sating windings so that its flux is constant  regardless of load, an
d the m otor's speed and armature current are known at any  one value of load, then it is possible to calculate its speed at any other value of  load, as long as the armature current at that load is known or can be detennined.  Example 9-1 illustrates this calculation.  Exa mpl e 9-1. A 50-hp, 250-V, 1200 r/min dc shunt motor with compensating  windings has an armature resistance (including the brushes, compensating windings, and  interpoles) of 0.06 n. Its field circuit has a total resistance R
odj + RF of 50 fl, which pro­ duces a no-load speed of 1200 r/min. There are 1200 tlU1lS per pole on the shunt field wind­ ing (see Figure 9-7).  (a) Find the speed of this motor when its input current is 100 A.  (b) Find the speed of this motor when its input current is 200 A.  (c) Find the speed of this motor when its input current is 300 A.  (d) Plot the torque-speed characteristic of this motor.  Solutioll  The internal generated voltage of a dc machine with its speed expressed in revolution
s per  minute is given by  (8-41)  Since the field current in the machine is constant (because Vr and the field resistance are  both constant), and since there are no annature reaction effects, the flux in this motor is  constant. The relationship between the speeds and internal generated voltages of the motor  at two different load conditions is thus  (9-8)  The constant K ' cancels, since it is a constant for any given machine, and the flux <p can­ cels as described above. Therefore,  (9-9)  5
42 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  At no load, the armature current is zero, so E"I = Vr = 250 V, while the speed nl =  12DO r/min. If we can calculate the internal generated voltage at any other load, it will be  possible to detennine the motor speed at that load from Equation (9--9).  (a) If h = lDO A, then the armature current in the motor is  V,  I" = It. - IF = It. - RF  - lOOA _ 250 V - 95A - son - Therefore, E" at this load will be  E" = Vr - I"R"  = 250 V - (95 A)(O.06 ll) = 244.3 V  Th
e resulting speed of the motor is  E"2 244.3 V 1200 / . n2 = E"I nl = 250V rmm = 1173 r/min  (b) If h = 2DO A, then the armature current in the motor is  I _ 2DOA _ 250V - 195A ,,- son - Therefore, E" at this load will be  E" = Vr - I"R"  = 250 V - (195 A)(O.()5 ll) = 238.3 V  The resulting speed of the motor is  E"2 238.3 V 1200 / . 1144 / . n2= En l= 250V rmm = rmm  "  (e) If h = 3DO A, then the armature current in the motor is  V,  I" = It. - IF = It. - RF  - 300 A _ 250 V - 295 A - son - The
refore, E" at this load will be  E" = Vr - I"R"  = 250 V - (295 A)(O.()5 ll) = 232.3 V  The resulting speed of the motor is  E"2 232.3 V 1200 / . n2 = E"I nl = 250V rmm = 1115r/min  (d) To plot the output characteristic of this motor, it is necessary to find the torque  corresponding to each value of speed. At no load, the induced torque "Tind is  clearly zero. The induced torque for any other load can be fOlUld from the fact  that power converted in a dc motor is  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATORS 543 
 I PCQDV Ell!'" 7indW I  From this equation, the induced torque in a motor is  E",!",  7iod = -­w  Therefore, the induced torque when !L = 100 A is  _ (244.3 V)(95 A) _  7 ;00 - (1173 r/min X I min/60sX27T rad!r) - Th e induced torque when h = 200 A is  (238.3 V)(95 A) = 388 N • m  7 ;00 = (1144 r/min X I min/60sX27T rad!r)  Th e induced torque when !L = 300 A is  (232.3 VX295 A) = 587 N • m  7 iOO = (1115 r/min X I min/60sX27T rad!r)  (8-55,8--56)  (9--10)  Th e resulting torque-speed character
istic for this m otor is plotted in Figure 9--8.  N onlinear An alysis of a Shunt D C M otor  T he nux $ and hen ce the internal generated vo ltage E", of a dc m achine is a non­ linear function of its ma gnetom otive force. T herefore, anything that changes the  1200  11110  0 11X1O  ~  • 0  900  800  7110  T  o 200 400 600 800  FIGU R E 9-8  The torque-speed characteristic of the motor in Ex amp le 9--1.  fiOO'  N·m  544 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ma gnetom otive force in a ma chine will
 have a nonlinear effect on the internal  generated voltage of the ma chine. Since the change in Ell cannot be calculated an­ alytically, the ma gnetization curve of the ma chine mu st be used to accurately de­ tennine its Ell for a given ma gnetom otive force. Th e two principal contributors to  the ma gnetom otive force in the ma chine are its field current and its annature re­ action, if present.  Since the ma gnetization curve is a direct plot of Ell versus IF for a given  speed w o , the ef
fect of changing a ma chine's field current can be detennined di­ rectly from its ma gnetization curve.  If a ma chine has annature reaction, its flux will be reduced with each  increase in load. Th e total ma gnetom otive force in a shunt dc m otor is the field  circuit ma gnetom otive force less the ma gnetom otive force due to annature re­ action (AR):  (9-11)  Since ma gnetization curves are expressed as plots of Ell versus field current, it is  customary to define an equivalent field curren
t that wou ld produce the sam e out­ put voltage as the combination of all the ma gnetom otive forces in the ma chine.  1lle resulting voltage Ell can then be detennined by locating that equivalent field  current on the ma gnetization curve. 1lle equivalent field current of a shunt dc m o­ tor is given by  (9- 12)  One other effect mu st be considered when nonlinear analysis is used to de­ termine the internal generated voltage ofa dc motor. Th e ma gnetization curves for  a ma chine are drawn f
or a particular speed, usually the rated speed of the ma­ chine. H ow can the effects of a given field current be determined if the m otor is  turning at other than rated speed?  1lle equation for the induced voltage in a dc ma chine when speed is ex­ pressed in revolutions per minute is  Ell = K 'cpn (8-41)  For a given effective field current, the flux in a ma chine is fixed, so the internal  generated voltage is related to speed by  (9- 13)  where Ello and 110 represent the reference values o
f voltage and speed, respectively.  If the reference conditions are known from the ma gnetization curve and the actual  Ell is know n from Kirchhoff's voltage law, then it is possible to determine the ac­ tual speed n from Equation (9-13).1lle use of the ma gnetization curve and Equa­ tions (9-12) and (9-13) is illustrated in the following example, which analyzes a  dc motor with armature reaction.  >  t  " .,  §  ." " .~ ,  !. a  300  250  233  200  150  100  50  II o 0.0  II  /  II  1.0 2.0  r
x: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 545  ,/ V  /  /  V  /  3.0 4.04.3 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0  Field current, A  FIGU R E 9-9  The magnetization curve of a typical 25()' V dc motor. taken at a speed of 1200 r/min.  EXllmpl e 9-2. A 5O-hp, 250-V, 1200 r/min dc shlUlt motor without compensating  windings has an armature resistance (including the brushes and interpoles) of 0.06 n. Its  field circuit has a total resistance RF + Radj of 50 n, which produces a no-load speed of  1200 r/min. There are 1200 turns p
er pole on the shunt field winding, and the armature re­ action produces a demagnetizing magnetomotive force of 840 A • turns at a load current of  200 A. The magnetization curve of this machine is shown in Figure 9-9.  (a) Find the speed of this motor when its input current is 200 A.  (b) This motor is essentially identical to the one in Example 9- 1 except for the ab­ sence of compen sating windings. H ow does its speed compare to that of the pre­ vious motor at a load current of 200 A?  (c) C
alculate and plot the torque-speed characteristic for this motor.  Solutioll  (a) If IL = 200 A, then the armature current of the motor is  V,  lit = IL - IF = h - R ,  - 2ooA - 250 V - 195A - 50n - 546 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  Th erefore, the internal generated voltage of the m achine is  EA = Vr - lARA  = 250 V - (195 A )(O.()5fi) = 238.3 V  At h = 200 A , the dem agnetizing m agnetom otive force due to arm ature reac­ tion is 840 A · turns, so the effective shunt field current 
of the m otor is  "'" r,,=IF - N , (9-12)  From the m agnetization curve, this effective field current wo uld produce an in­ ternal generated voltage EAO of 233 Va t a speed 110 of 1200 r/min.  W e know that the internal generated voltage EAO wo uld be 233 V at a speed  of 1200 r/min. Since the actual internal generated voltage EA is 238.3 V, the ac­ tual operating speed of the m otor mu st be  (9-13)  EA 238.3 V (1200 I . ) n= £ no = 233V rmm =  "  1227 r/min  (b) At 200 A of load in Ex am ple 
9--1, the m otor's speed was n = 11 44 r/min. In this  exam ple, the m otor's speed is 1227 r/min. Notice that the speed of the motor  with armature reaction is higher than the speed of the motor with no armature  reaction. This relative increase in speed is due to the flux wea kening in the m a­ chine with armature reaction.  (c) To derive the torque-speed characteristic of this m otor, we mu st calculate the  torque and speed for many different conditions of load. Unfortunately, the de­ m agne
tizing arm ature reaction magnetom otive force is only given for one con­ dition of load (200 A ). Since no additional informa tion is available, we w ill as­ srune that the strength of '.JAR varies linearly with load current.  A MATL A B M -file which automates this calculation and plots the resulting  torque-speed characteristic is shown below . It peIfonns the sam e steps as part a  to detennine the speed for each load current, and then calculates the induced  torque at that speed. Note that 
it reads the m agnetization curve from a file called  f ig9 _ 9 . m a t. This file and the other magnetization curves in this chapter are  available for dow nload from the book's W orld Wi de W eb site (see Preface for  details).  ~ M-file: shunt_ t s_curve.m  ~ M-file c reate a p lo t o f the to rq u e-speed cu rve o f the  ~ the s hunt dc m o to r w ith a rma ture reactio n in  ~ Examp le 9 - 2.  ~ Ge t the m agnetizatio n c u rve. This file conta ins the  ~ three variables if_va lue, ea_va lu
e, a nd n_O.  load fig9_9.m a t  ~ First , initia lize the va lues n eeded in this p rog ram .  v_t = 250; % T e rmin a l vo ltage (V)  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATOR S 547  c -f 0 50 ; • Fie ld r esi s t a n ce (ohm s)  c -"  0 0 .06 ; • A rm a ture r esi s t a n ce (ohm s)  i 1 0 1 0,1 0,300 ; • Lin e c urre nts (A )  0 -f 0 1200 ; • Num ber of turns 0 0 fie ld  f -"c O 0 84 0 ; • A rm a ture r eact i o n , 200 A  % Ca lc u la t e the a rm a ture c urre nt fo r each load .  i_a = i_ l - v_t I r_ f ;
  % N ow calc u la t e the inte rna l gen e r a t ed vo lt age fo r  % each a rm a ture c urre nt.  e_a = v_t - i _a * r_a;  (A - t im )  % Ca lc u la t e the a rm a ture r eact io n MM F f o r each a rm a ture  % c urre nt.  f_ar = (i_a I 200) * f_ar O:  % Ca lc u la t e the e ffect ive fie ld c urre nt.  i f = v_t I r_ f - f _ar I n_ f :  % Ca lc u la t e the r esu lt in g inte rna l gen e r a t ed vo lt age a t  % 1200 r /m in by inte rpo la t in g the m o t o r 's m agn e t i za t io n  % c 
urve .  e_aO = inte rp l (if_va lues, ea_ va lu e s, i_ f , 'splin e ' ) ;  % Ca lc u la t e the r esultin g speed f r om Eq u a t io n (9- 13 ) .  n = ( e_a .1 e_aO ) .. n_O:  % Ca lc u la t e the in d u ced t o r q u e co rrespon d in g t o each  % speed fr om E q u a t io n s (8- 55 ) a n d (8- 56 ) .  t_ in d = e_a .* i_a .1 (n .. 2 .. p i I 60):  % P lo t the t o r q u e - speed c u rve  p lo t (t_ in d, n , 'Co l o r' , 'k' , 'Lin eW id th' ,2.0 ) ;  h o ld o n ;  x labe l (' \t au _(i nd}
 (N -m ) ', 'Fo ntwe i g ht' , 'Bo ld ') ;  y labe l ('\i tn_(m } \rm \b f (r /m in ) ', 'Fo ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld '):  ('\b f Shunt OC m o t o r t o r q u e - speed c h a r act e r i st ic ')  ax i s([ 0 600 11 00 1300 ] );  g r id o n ;  h o ld o ff;  Th e resulting torque-speed characteristic is shown in Figure 9-10. Note that for any given  load. the speed of the m otor w ith arm ature reaction is higher than the speed of the m otor  w ithout arm ature reaction.  Speed Co ntrol of Shunt D C M 
otors  H ow can the speed of a shunt dc m otor be controlled? T here are two comm on  m ethods and one less comm on method in use. 1lle comm on methods have already  been seen in the simple linear m achine in C hapter 1 and the simple rotating loop  in C hapter 8. T he two comm on ways in w hich the speed of a shunt dc m achine  can be controlled are by  548 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  1300 ,------,--,----,------,--,------,  1280  1260  1240  1220 t--~---'---:­~ 1200  ./"80  ]]60  ]]40  ]
]20  ]]00 '-----c'cC_-~-__C'c---c'cC_-~-~  o 100 200 300 400 500 600  'tiD<! N·m  ""GU R E 9-10  The torque--speed characteristic of the motor with armature reaction in Ex ample 9--2.  I. Adjusting the field resistance RF (and thus the field nux)  2. Adjusting the tenninal voltage applied to the annature.  The less comm on method of speed control is by  3. Inserting a resistor in series with the armature circuit.  E:1.ch of these methods is described in detail below.  C H ANG ING THE FIEL D RES 
ISTANCE. To understand what happens when the  field resistor of a dc m otor is changed. assume that the field resistor increases and  observe the response. If the field resistance increases, then the field current de­ creases (IF = Vr lR F i), and as the field current decreases, the nux <P decreases  with it. A decrease in nux causes an instantaneous decrease in the internal gener­ ated voltage EA(= K<p-tw), which causes a large increase in the ma chine's anna­ ture current, since  1lle induced 
torque in a motor is given by "TiDd = K<pfA' Since the nux <p in  this ma chine decreases while the current fA increases, which way does the induced  torque change? 1lle easiest way to answer this question is to look at an example.  Figure 9- 1 I shows a shunt dc m otor with an internal resistance of 0.25 O. lt  is currently operating with a tenninal voltage of 250 V and an internal generated  voltage of 245 V. 1llerefore, the annature current now is fA = (250 V - rx: MmDR S AND GENERATORS 549  
RA '" 0.250  +  + EA ",245 V'" Kfw VT ", 250 V  FIGURE 9- 11  A 250-V shunt de motor with typical values of EA and R A.  245 V)/0.25 n = 20 A. What happens in this m otor if there is a I percent decrease  influx? If the flux decreases by I percent, then EA mu st decrease by I percent too,  because EA = K4>w. Therefore, EA will drop to  EA 2 = 0.99 EAt = 0.99(245 V) = 242.55 V  The annature current mu st then rise to  f = 250 V - 242.55 V = 298 A  A 0.25 n .  Thus a I percent decrease in flux pro
duced a 49 percent increase in armature  current.  So to get back to the original discussion, the increase in current predomi­ nates over the decrease in flux, and the induced torque rises:  U  Tjnd = K4> fA  Since Tind > Tto"," the m otor speeds up.  H owever, as the m otor speeds up, the internal generated voltage EA rises,  causing fA to fall. As fA falls, the induced torque Tind falls too, and fmally T;Dd again  equals Ttood at a higher steady-state speed than originally.  To summ arize the 
cause-and-effcct behavior involved in this m ethod of  speed control:  I. Increasing RF causes fF(= VT IRF i) to decrease.  2. De creasing IF decreases 4>.  3. De creasing 4> lowers EA (= K4>J..w).  4. De creasing EA increases fA(= VT -EA J..)IRA- 5. Increasing fA increases T;od(= K4>U AfI), with the change in fA dominant over  the change in flux).  6. Increasing Tind m akes T;od > Ttood, and the speed w increases.  7. Increasing to increases EA = Kcf>wi again.  550 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTA
LS  (a)  ,b,  8. Increasing Elt decreases lit- FlGU RE 9-12  The effect of field resistance speed  control on a shunt motor's  torque-speed characteristic:  (a) over the motor's normal  operating range: (b) over the entire  range from no-load to stall  conditions.  9. De creasing lit decreases "Tind until "Tind = "TJoad at a higher speed w.  Th e effect of increasing the field resistance on the output characteristic of a shu nt  motor is shown in Figure 9-12a. N otice that as the flux in the ma 
chine decreases,  the no-load speed of the m otor increases, while the slope of the torque-speed  curve becomes steeper. Naturally, decreasing RF wou ld reverse the whole process,  and the speed of the m otor wou ld drop.  A WARNING ABOUT FIELD RESISTAN CE SPEED CO NTROL. TIle effect of in­ creasing the field resistance on the output characteristic of a shunt dc m otor is  show n in Figure 9-12. Notice that as the flux in the ma chine decreases, the no­ load speed of the m otor increases, while 
the slope of the torque-speed curve be­ com es steeper. This shape is a consequence of Equation (9-7), which describes  the tenninal characteristic of the motor. In Equation (9-7), the no-load speed is  R, I, V ariable  - +  voltage  controller  +  E, V, - - FIGURE 9-13  /- rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 55 1  I,  -y,,! I,  ~ R,  L,  VTis oonstant  VA is variable  +  V,  Armature voltage control of a shunt (or separately excited) dc motor.  proportional to the reciprocal of the nUX: in the motor, whil
e the slope of the curve  is proportional to the reciprocal of the flux squared. Therefore, a decrease in flux  causes the slope of the torque-speed curve to become steeper.  Figure 9- I 2a show s the tenninal characteristic of the motor over the range  from no-load to full-load conditions. Over this range, an increase in field resis­ tance increases the m otor's speed, as described above in this section. For motors  operating between no-load and full-load conditions, an increase in RF may relia
bly  be expected to increase operating speed.  N ow examine Figure 9- 12h. This figure show s the tenninal characteristic of  the m otor over the full range from no-load to stall conditions. It is apparent from  the figure that at very slow speeds an increase in field resistance will actually de­ crease the speed of the motor. TIlis effect occurs because, at very low speeds, the  increase in annature current caused by the decrease in Ell. is no longer large  enough to compen sate for the decreas
e in flux in the induced torque equation.  With the flux decrease actually larger than the armature current increase, the in­ duced torque decreases, and the motor slows down.  Some small dc m otors used for control purposes actually operate at speeds  close to stall conditions. For these motors, an increase in field resistance might have  no effect, or it might even decrease the speed of the motor. Since the results are not  predictable, field resistance speed control should not be used in thes
e types of dc  m otors. Instead, the annature voltage method of speed control shou ld be employed.  C H ANG ING THE A RM ATU R E VOLTAGE. TIle second form of speed control in­ volves changing the voltage applied to the armature of the m otor without chang­ ing the voltage applied to the field. A connection similar to that in Figure 9- \3 is  necessary for this type of control. In effect, the motor mu st be separately excited  to use armature voltage control.  If the voltage VA is increased, then
 the annature current in the m otor mu st  rise [Ill. = (VA i - EA)IRAl A s /11. increases, the induced torque "Tind = K4>IA i in­ creases, making "Tind > "TJoad, and the speed w of the motor increases.  552 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v"  '----------------find  ""GURE 9-14  The effect of armature voltage speed control on a shunt motor's torque-speed characteristic.  Bul as the speed w increases, the internal generaled voltage EA (= K4>wi)  increases, causing the armature current to decre
ase. This decrease in JA decreases  the induced torque, causing Tind to equal Ttoad at a higher rotational speed w.  To summarize the cause-and-effect behavior in this m ethod of speed  control:  I. An increase in VA increases JA [= (VA i - EA )/R A].  2. Increasing JA increases Tind (= K4>JA i).  3. Increasing Tind mak es TiDd > TJoad increasing w.  4. Increasing w increases EA (= K4>wi).  5. Increasing EA decreases JA [= (VA i - EA )/RAl  6. De creasing JA decreases Tind until Tind = TJoad at 
a higher w.  TIle effect of an increase in VA on the torque-speed characteristic of a sepa­ rately excited motor is show n in Figure 9- 14. N otice that the no-load speed of the  m otor is shifted by this m ethod of speed control, but the slope of the curve re­ mains constant.  INSE RTI NG A R ES ISTO R IN SE R IES W ITH THE ARl\lATU R E c m.CU IT. If a  resistor is inserted in series with the annature circuit, the effect is to drastically in­ crease the slope of the m otor's torque-speed charac
teristic, making it operate  more slow ly if loaded (Figure 9-15). lllis fact can easily be seen from Equation  (9-7). T he insertion of a resistor is a very wasteful m ethod of speed control, since  the losses in the inserted resistor are very large. For this reason, it is rarely used.  It will be found only in applications in which the m otor spends almost all its time  operating at fuJI speed or in applications too inexpensive to justify a better form  of speed control.  TIle two m ost comm o
n methods of shunt m otor speed control- field resis­ tance variation and armature voltage variation- have different safe ranges of  operation.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 553  '------------------ '00  FIGURE 9-15  The effect of armature resistance speed control on a shunt motor's torque-speed characteristic.  In field resistance control, the low er the field current in a shunt (or sepa­ rately excited) dc m otor, the faster it turns: and the higher the field current, the  slow er it turns. Since 
an increase in field current causes a decrease in speed, there  is always a minimum achievable speed by field circuit control. This minimum  speed occurs when the m otor's field circuit has the ma ximum permissible current  flow ing through it.  If a motor is operating at its rated terminal voltage, power, and field current,  then it will be running at rated speed, also know n as base speed. Field resistance  control can control the speed of the m otor for speeds above base speed but not for  sp
eeds below base speed. To achieve a speed slowe r than base speed by field cir­ cuit control would require excessive field current, possibly burning up the field  windings.  In armature voltage control, the lower the armature voltage on a separately  excited dc m otor, the slower it turns; and the higher the armature voltage, the  faster it turns. Since an increase in annature voltage causes an increase in speed,  there is always a maximum achievable speed by armature voltage control. This  maxi
mum speed occurs when the m otor's armature voltage reaches its maximum  permissible level.  If the m otor is operating at its rated voltage, field current, and power, it will  be turning at base speed. Annature voltage control can control the speed of the  motor for speeds below base speed but not for speeds above base speed. To  achieve a speed faster than base speed by armature voltage control would require  excessive annature voltage, possibly damaging the annature circuit.  These two techni
ques of speed control are obviously complem entary. Ar­ mature voltage control works well for speeds below base speed, and field resis­ tance or field current control works well for speeds above base speed. By com­ bining the two speed-control techniques in the sam e motor, it is possible to get a  range of speed variations of up to 40 to I or more. Shunt and separately excited dc  m otors have excellent speed control characteristics.  554 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Maximum  torque fmax 
 Maximum  powerP mu  fmax constant  P mu constant  VA control  RFcontrol  "------cC------,­ ,~  ""GU R E 9-16  fmu constant so P rmx constant  P IOU '" f mn w..,-_____ _  V" control  VA control  <-----~------- ,.  ,~  Power and torque limits as a function of speed for a shunt motor under annature volt and field  resistance control.  TIlere is a significant difference in the torque and power limits on the ma­ chine under these two types of speed control. Th e limiting factor in either case is  th
e heating of the annature conductors, which places an upper limit on the ma g­ nitude of the annature current Ill..  For annature voltage control, the flux in the motor is constant, so the maxi­ mum torque in the m otor is  (9-14)  This maximum torque is constant regardless of the speed of the rotation of the m o­ tor. Since the power out of the motor is given by P = "TW , the maximum power of  the m otor at any speed under annature voltage control is  (9- 15)  TIlU S the maximum power out of th
e motor is directly proportional to its operat­ ing speed under armature voltage control.  On the other hand, when field resistance control is used, the flux does  change. In this form of control, a speed increase is caused by a decrease in the ma­ chine's flux. In order for the annature current limit not to be exceeded, the in­ duced torque limit mu st decrease as the speed of the motor increases. Since the  power out of the m otor is given by P = "TW, and the torque limit decreases as the  spe
ed of the m otor increases, the max imum power out of a dc motor under field  current control is constant, while the max imum torque varies as the reciprocal of  the motor's speed.  TIlese shunt dc m otor power and torque limitations for safe operation as a  function of speed are show n in Figure 9-16.  TIle follow ing examp les illustrate how to fmd the new speed of a dc m otor  if it is varied by field resistance or annature voltage control methods.  rx: MaJ"ORS AND GENERATORS 555  RA '" 0.03 
n  - - ",  +~-------, ,-----v./v--~ +  +  ,b,  FIGU R E 9-17  (3) The shunt motor in Ex amp le 9--3. (b) The separately excited de motor in Ex amp le 9--4.  Exa mpl e 9-3. Figure 9--17a shows a 1000hp. 250-V, 1200 rhnin shlUlt dc motor with  an armature resistance of 0.03 n and a field resistance of 41.67 O. The motor has compen­ sating windings. so armature reaction can be ignored. M echanical and core losses may be as­ sumed to be negligible for the purposes of this problem. The motor is assmn
ed to be driving  a load with a line current of 126 A and an initial speed of 1103 r/min. To simplify the prob­ lem. assmne that the amolUlt of armature current drawn by the motor remains constant.  (a) If the machine's magnetization curve is shown in Figure 9-9. what is the mo­ tor's speed if the field resistance is raised to 50 n1  (b) Calculate and plot the speed of this motor as a ftmction of the field resistance RI'  assuming a constant-current load.  Solutioll  (a) The motor has an initial
 line current of 126 A, so the initial armature current is  150 V IA I = lu - 1Ft = 126A - 41.67 n = 120A  Therefore, the internal generated voltage is  EA I = VT - IA tRA = 250 V - (120 A)(0.03fi)  = 246.4 V  After the field resistance is increased to 50 n, the field current will become  556 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I - VT _2S0V -SA  F2 - RF - 50 n - The ratio of the internal generated voltage at one speed to the internal generated  voltage at another speed is given by the ratio of Eq
uation (&--41) at the two speeds:  Elll _ K'q,ln2  Elll - K'q,[n[ (9- 16)  B ecause the armature current is assumed constant, EIlI = Elll, and this equation  reduces to  ~,  n2=q,lnl (9- 17)  A magnetization curve is a plot of Ell versus IF for a given speed. Since the val­ ues of Ell on the curve are directly proportional to the flux, the ratio of the inter­ nal generated voltages read off the curve is equal to the ratio of the fluxes within  the machine. At IF = 5 A, Ello = 250 V, while at IF 
= 6 A, Ello = 268 V. There- fore, the ratio of fluxes is given by  q,[ 268 V = = 1.076 q,l 250 V  and the new s~ed of the motor is  n2 = !:nl = (1.076XII03r/min) = 1187r/min  (b) A MAT LAB M-file that calculates the s~ed of the motor as a ftmction of RF is  shown below.  ~ M -file, r f_speed_co ntro l .m  ~ M -file c reate a p lo t o f the speed of a shunt dc  ~ m o to r as a func t io n o f f ie ld resis tance, assum i ng  ~ a con stant armature c urrent (Examp le 9 - 3).  ~ Get the magnet izat
io n c urve. Th is file contain s the  ~ three var iables if_va lu e, ea_va lu e, and n_O.  load fig9_9.mat  ~ Fir st , initia lize  v_t = 250;  c -f 0 40,1:70;  c -"  0 0.03;  i -"  0 12 0;  the va lu es n eeded in this program.  ~ Term ina l vo ltage (V)  ~ Fie ld res istance (ohm s)  ~ Armature res istance (ohm s)  ~ Armature c urrents (A )  ~ T he approach here is to calc u late the e_aO at the  ~ reference fie ld c urrent, and then to calcu late the  ~ e_aO fo r every fie ld c urrent. Th e 
re fe rence speed is  ~ 11 03 r /m in , so by know ing the e_aO and refe rence  ~ speed, we w ill be able to calcu late the speed at the  ~ other fie ld c urrent.  rx: M mD R S A ND G ENE RATO R S 557  % Ca lc ula te the inte rna l gen e ra ted vo ltage a t 1 200 r/min  % fo r the re fe re nce fie ld c urre nt (5 A ) by inte rpo la ting  % the m o to r 's m agne tizatio n c urve. Th e re fe re nce speed  % correspond ing to this fie ld c urre nt is 11 03 r /min .  e_aO_ re f = inte rp l (if_va l
ues, ea_va lues, 5, 'spline ') ;  n_ re f = 11 03;  % Ca lc ula te the fie ld c urre nt fo r each va lue o f field  % resista nce.  i_ f = v_t ./ r_ f ;  % Ca lc ula te the E_aO fo r each fie ld c urre nt by  % inte rpo la ting the m o to r 's m agne tizatio n c urve.  e_aO = inte rp l (if_va lues, ea_va lues, i_ f , 'spline ') ;  % Ca lc ula te the resulting speed from Eq uatio n (9-17):  % n2 = (phil / phi2 ) .. nl = (e_aO_ l / e_aO_2 ) .. nl  n2 = ( e_aO_ re f . / e_aO ) .. n_ re f ;  % Plo t
 the speed ver su s r_ f c urve.  p lo t (r_ f , n2, 'Co lo r' , 'k' , 'LineW id th' ,2.0) ;  h o ld o n ;  x labe l ( 'Field resis ta nce, \Om ega ', 'Fo ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  y labe l ('\itn_(m } \rm \b f (r /min )', 'Fo ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  title ('Speed vs \itR_(F ) \rm \b f f o r a Shunt IX: Mo to r',  'Fo ntwe ig ht', 'Bo ld ');  ax is([40 70 0 1400 ]);  g rid o n ;  h o ld o ff;  Th e resulting plot is show n in Figure 9-18.  1400  1200 , ,  IlXXl  .§ 800  ~  • 600 0  400  200  0 4
0 45 60 65 70  Field resistance. n  FIGU RE 9- 18  Plot of speed versus field resistance for the shunt dc motor of Ex ample 9-3.  558 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  N ote that the assumption of a constant annature current as RF changes is not  a very go<Xl one for real loads. Th e current in the annature will vary with speed in  a fashion dependent on the torque required by the type of load attached to the m o­ tor. Th ese differences wi ll cause a m otor's speed-versus-R F curve to be slightl
y  different than the one shown in Fig ure 9-18, but it will have a similar shape.  Example 9-4. The motor in Example 9-3 is now cotUlected separately excited, as  shown in Figure 9-17b. The motor is initially flmning with VA = 250 V, IA = 120 A, and  n = 1103 rlmin, while supplying a constant-torque load. What will the speed of this motor  be if VA is reduced to 200 V ?  Solutio"  The motor has an initial line current of 120 A and an armature voltage VA of 250 V, so the  internal generated volt
age EA is  EA = Vr - lARA = 250 V - (l20AXO.03!l) = 246.4 V  By applying Equation (9-16) and realizing that the flux ~ is constant, the motor's speed  can be expressed as  To find EJa use Kirchhoff's voltage law:  ", =  EJa = Vr - lJaRA  (9-16)  Since the torque is constant and the flux is constant, IA is constant. This yields a voltage of  EJa = 200 V - (120 AXO.03 !l) = 196.4 V  The final speed of the motor is thus  E A2 196.4V,'03 /· 879/· ~ = E At nt = 246.4 V r mill = r min  The Effect of a
n Open Field Circuit  TIle previous section of this chapter contained a discussion of speed control by  varying the field resistance of a shunt mot o r. A s the field resistance increased, the  speed of the m otor increased with it. What w ould happen if this effect were taken  to the extreme, if the field resistor really increased? What w ould happen if the  field circuit actually opened while the m otor wa s running? From the previous dis­ cussion, the flux in the ma chine w ould drop drastica
lly, all the way down to ~res,  and EA (= K~w) w ould drop with it. This w o uld cause a really enonnous increase  in the armature current, and the resulting induced torque w ould be quite a bit  higher than the load torque on the mot or. TIlerefore, the m otor's speed starts to  rise and just keeps going up.  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATORS 559  Th e results of an open field circuit can be quite spectacular. Wh en the au­ thor wa s an undergraduate, his laboratory group once made a mistake of this so
rt.  Th e group wa s working with a small m otor-generator set being driven by a 3-hp  shunt dc motor. Th e m otor was connected and ready to go, but there wa s just one  little mistake- when the field circuit wa s connected, it was fused with a O.3-A  fuse instead of the 3-A fuse that wa s supposed to be used.  Wh en the motor was started, it ran nonnally for about 3 s, and then sud­ denly there was a flash from the fuse. ]mm ediately, the motor's speed skyrock­ eted. Someon e turned the main c
ircuit breaker off within a few seconds, but by  that time the tachometer attached to the m otor had pegged at 4000 r/min. TIle m o­ tor itself was only rated for 800 rim in.  N eedless to say, that experience scared everyone present very badly and  taught them to be most careful about field circuit protection. In dc motor starting  and protection circuits, afield loss relay is nonnally included to disconnect the  m otor from the line in the event of a loss of field current.  A similar effect ca
n occur in ordinary shunt dc motors operating with light  fields if their annature reaction effects are severe enough. If the annature reaction  on a dc m otor is severe, an increase in load can weaken its flux enough to actually  cause the motor's speed to rise. H owever, m ost loads have torque-speed curves  whose torque increases with speed, so the increased speed of the m otor increases  its load, which increases its annature reaction, weakening its flux again. TIle  weaker flux causes a fur
ther increase in speed, further increasing load, etc., until  the m otor overspeeds. nlis condition is known as runaway.  In m otors operating with very severe load changes and duty cycles, this flux­ weakening problem can be solved by installing compen sating windings.  Unfortunately, compen sating windings are too expensive for use on ordinary run-of­ the-mill m otors. TIle solution to the runaway problem employed for less-expensive,  less-severe duty m otors is to provide a turn or two of cum
ulative compounding to  the m otor's poles. As the load increases, the ma gnetom otive force from the series  turns increases, which counteracts the demagnetizing ma gnetom otive force of the  annature reaction. A shunt m otor equipped with just a few series turns like this is  calJed a stabilized shunt motor.  9.5 THE PERMANENT-MAGNET DC MOTOR  A permanent-magnet de (PM DC ) motor is a dc m otor whose poles are mad e of  pennanent ma gnets. Permanent-magnet dc m otors offer a number of benefits
  compared with shunt dc motors in some applications. Since these m otors do not  require an external field circuit, they do not have the field circuit copper losses as­ sociated with shunt dc m otors. Because no field windings are required, they can  be smaller than corresponding shunt dc m otors. PMDC m otors are especially  comm on in smaller fractional-and subfractional-horsepower sizes, where the ex­ pense and space of a separate field circuit cannot be justified.  H oweve r, PMDC motors al
so have disadvantages. Pennanent ma gnets can­ not produce as high a flux density as an externally supplied shunt field, so a  560 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Residual flux  density n ...  ---- --------------.f~t-----------------H ~r~)  ""GURE 9-19  Coercive  M agnetizing  intensity H e  ----- (.j  (a) The magnetization curve of a typical ferromagnetic material. Note the hysteresis loop. After a  large ntagnetizing intensity H is applied to the core and then removed. a residual flux densi
ty n ...  rentains behind in the core. This flux can be brought to zero if a coercive magnetizing intensity H e is  applied to the core with the opposite polarity. In this case. a relatively sntall value of it will  demagnetize the core.  PMDC m otor will have a lower induced torque "rind per ampere of annature cur­ rent lit than a shunt motor of the same size and construction. In addition, PMDC  mot ors run the risk of demagnetization. As m entioned in Chapler 8, the annature  current lit in a 
dc ma chine produces an annature ma gnetic field of its ow n. Th e ar­ mature mlllf subtracts from the mmf of the poles under som e portions of the pole  faces and adds to the rnrnfofthe poles under other portions of the pole faces (see  Figures 8-23 and 8-25), reducing the overall net nux in the ma chine. T his is the  armature reaction effect. In a PMDC ma chine, the pole nux is just the residual  flux in the pennanent ma gnets. If the armature current becomes very large, there  is some risk t
hat the armature mmf ma y demagnetize the poles, pennanenlly re­ ducing and reorienting the residual flux in them. Demagnetizalion may also be  caused by the excessive heating which can occur during prolonged periods of  overload.  Figure 9- 19a shows a ma gnetization curve for a typical ferromagnetic ma­ terial. II is a plot of flux density B versus ma gnelizing intensity H (or equivalently,  a plot of flux <p versus mlllf ?]i). When a strong external ma gnetom otive force is  applied 10 this m
aterial and then removed, a residual flux B .... will remain in the  material. To force the residual flux to zero, it is necessary to apply a coercive ma g­ netizing inlensity H e with a polarity opposite 10 the polarity of the ma gnetizing in­ lensity H that originally established the ma gnetic field. For normal ma chine  rx: M mD R S A ND G ENE RATO R S 561  II (or¢)  HcC3'C)~  -----'f----+--+-------H (or 3')  ,b,  Alnico 5  Samarium cobalt  Ceramic 7 _~,  B. T  I.,  1.4  1.3  1.2  U  1.0  0.9
  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.'  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1  - 1000 -900 - 800 -700 - 600 -500 - 400 -300 -200 - 100 0  H .kAlm  "I  FIGURE 9- 19 (roncludtd)  (b) Th e magnetization curve of a ferromagnetic material suitable for use in permanent magnets. N ote  the high residual flux density II ... and the relatively large coercive magnetizing intensity H e. (c) The  second quadrant of the magnetization curves of some typical magnetic materials. N ote that the rare­ earth magnets combine both a high residual flux 
and a high coercive magnetizing intensity.  562 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  applications such as rotors and stators, a ferromagnetic material should be picked  which has as small a B r .. and H c as possible, since such a material will have low  hysteresis losses.  On the other hand, a good material for the poles of a PMDC m otor should  have as large a residualflux density Bros as possible, while simultaneously having  as large a coercive magnetizing intensity H cas possible. The ma gnetiz
ation curve  of such a material is show n in Figure 9- I 9b. TIle large B r•s produces a large fl ux  in the ma chine, while the large H c means that a very large current would be re­ quired to demagnetize the poles.  In the last 40 years, a number of new ma gnetic materials have been devel­ oped which have desirable characteristics for making pennanent ma gnets. Th e  major types of materials are the ceramic (ferrite) ma gnetic materials and the rare­ earth ma gnetic materials. Figure 9- I 9c s
how s the second quadrant of the ma gne­ tization curves of some typical ceramic and rare-earth ma gnets, compa red to the  ma gnetization curve of a conventional ferromagnetic alloy (A lnico 5). It is obvi­ ous from the comparison that the best rare-earth ma gnets can produce the same  residual flux as the best conventional ferromagnetic alloys, while simultaneously  being largely immun e to demagnetization problems due to annature reaction.  A pennanent-magnet dc m otor is basically the same m
a chine as a shunt dc  motor, except that the flux ofa PMDC motor isfixed. TIlerefore, it is not possible  to control the speed of a PMD C m otor by varying the field current or flux. Th e  only methods of speed control available for a PM DC m otor are armature voltage  control and annature resistance control.  For m ore information about PMDC m otors, see References 4 and 10.  9.6 THE SERIES DC MOTOR  A series dc m otor is a dc m otor whose field windings consist of a relatively few  turns conn
ected in series with the annature circuit. TIle equivalent circuit of a se­ ries dc m otor is show n in Figure 9-20. In a series m otor, the annature current,  field current, and line current are all the same. TIle Kirchhoff's voltage law equa­ tion for this m otor is  (9- 18)  Induced Torque in a Series DC Motor  TIle tenninal characteristic of a series dc m otor is very different from that of the  shunt m otor previously studied. Th e basic behavior of a series dc motor is due to  the fact tha
t the flux is directly proP011iolUll to the armature current, at least until  saturation is reached. A s the load on the m otor increases, its flux increases too. As  seen earlier, an increase in flux in the m otor causes a decrease in its speed. TIle re­ sult is that a series motor has a sharply drooping torque-speed characteristic.  TIle induced torque in this ma chine is given by Equation (8-49):  (8-49)  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATORS 563  + v,  llt= ls= IL  VT= EIt + lit (RIt + Rs)  FIGURE 9-10 
 Th e equiva.lent circuit of a series dc motor.  Th e nux in this m achine is directly proportional to its armature current (at least  until the m etal saturates).lllerefore, the nux in the ma chine can be given by  (9-19)  where c is a constant of proportionality. TIle induced torque in this ma chine is thus  given by  (9-20)  In other words, the torque in the m otor is proportional to the square of its ann a­ ture current. As a result of this relationship, it is easy to see that a series m oto
r  gives m ore torque per ampere than any other dc m otor. It is therefore used in ap­ plications requiring very high torques. Exampl es of such applications are the  starter m otors in cars, elevator m otors, and tractor motors in locom otives.  The Terminal Characteristic of a Series DC Motor  To detennine the tenninal characteristic of a series dc m otor, an analysis will be  based on the assumption of a linear magnetization curve, and then the effects of  saturation will be considered in a g
raphical analysis.  Th e assumption of a linear magnetization curve implies that the nux in the  m otor will be given by Equation (9-19):  (9-19)  This equation will be used to derive the torque-speed characteristic curve for the  series m otor.  Th e derivation of a series m otor's torque-speed characteristic starts with  Kirchhoff's voltage law:  V T = E lt + IIt(RIt + R s) (9-18)  From Equation (9-20), the armature current can be expressed as  564 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Also, Ell 
= K~w. Substituting these expressions in Equation (9- 18) yields  (T:::;  VT = K~w + Vic(RA + R s) (9-21)  If the nux can be eliminated from this expression, it will directly relate the  torque of a motor to its speed. To eliminate the nux from the expression, notice that  and the induced torque equation can be rewritten as  K Tind = cq?  TIlerefore, the nux in the motor can be rewritten as  ~ = H'Jrind (9-22)  Substituting Equation (9-22) into Equation (9-21) and solving for speed yields  " {T:
::; VT = Kv ;('Jrindw + VKc (R A + R s)  RA + R s  'I/KC VTindW = VT - ',IKe VTind  V T R A + R s  w = VKc VTind - Ke  TIle resulting torque-speed relationship is  V T I R A + R s w - ------- VKc VTind Ke (9-23)  Notice that for an unsaturated series m otor the speed of the m otor varies as the  reciprocal of the square root of the torque. TImt is quite an unusual relationship!  TIlis ideal torque-speed characteristic is plotted in Figure 9-21.  One disadvantage of series m otors can be seen imm
 ediately from this equa­ tion. Wh en the torque on this m otor goes to zero, its speed goes to infinity. In  practice, the torque can never go entirely to zero because of the m echanical, core,  and stray losses that mu st be overcome. H oweve r, if no other load is connected to  the motor, it can turn fast enough to seriously damage itself. Never completely un­ load a series m otor, and never connect one to a load by a belt or other me chanism  that could break. If that w ere to happen and the
 m otor w ere to become unloaded  while running, the results could be serious.  TIle nonlinear analysis of a series dc m otor with ma gnetic saturation effects,  but ignoring armature reaction, is illustrated in Exampl e 9-5.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 565  'n  FIGU R E 9-21  The torque-speed characteristic of a series dc motor.  Exa m ple 9-5. Figure 9--20 shows a 250-V series dc motor with compen sating  windings. and a total series resistance RA + Rs of 0.08 ll. The series field consists of 25
  turns per pole. with the magnetization curve shown in Figure 9-22.  (a) Find the speed and induced torque of this motor for when its armature current  is 50A.  (b) Calculate and plot the torque-speed characteristic for this motor.  Solutioll  (a) To analyze the behavior of a series motor with saturation. pick points along the  operating curve and find the torque and speed for each point. Notice that the  magnetization curve is given in lUlits of magnetomotive force (ampere-turns)  versus EA fo
r a speed of 1200 r/min. so calculated EA values must be compared  to the equivalent values at 1200 r/min to detennine the actual motor speed.  For IA = 50 A.  EA = Vr - IA(RA + Rs) = 250 V - (50AXO.080) = 246 V  Since IA = I" = 50 A. the magne tomotive force is  ?:f = NI = (25turnsX50A ) = 1250A o tum s  From the magnetization curve at?:f = 1250 A ° turns. EAO = 80 V. To get the  correct speed of the motor. remember that. from Equation (9- 13).  E,  " =- "" E"  = 286\; 120 r/min = 3690 r/min  T
o find the induced torque supplied by the motor at that speed. ra;all that  p 00IfV = EAIA = 7; .... W. Therefore.  566 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  >  J • 00  •  ~  " • , ,  • 00  • 0  ~  = (246 VX50 A) _ •  (3690r/minXlmin/60sX27Tradlr) - 3 1.8N m  (b) To calculate the complete torque-speed characteristic, we mu st repeat the steps  in a for many values of armature current. A MATLAB M -file that calculates the  torque-speed characteristics of the series dc motor is shown below. Note that t
he  magnetization curve used by this program works in terms of field magnetomo­ tive force instead of effective field current.  % M-fi l e : series_ts_curve .m  % M-fi l e c r eat e a p l o t o f the t o rque-speed c urve o f the  % the series dc m o t o r w ith armat ure reac tio n in  % Examp l e 9 - 5.  % Ge t the magn e tizatio n c urve . This file conta ins the  % three variabl es mmf _va lues, ea_va lues, a n d n_O.  l oad fig9_22 .mat  300  2'" ./" .....- / II .. '" 1200 rhnin  /  /  200 
 /  /  I'"  /  II  100  II  1000 2000 3000 4(xx) 5000 6(XXl 7000 g(XX) 9000 1O.(xx)  Field magnetomotive force 3'. A . turns  HGUR E 9-12  The magnetization curve of the motor in Ex ample 9-5. This curve was taken at speed II,. = 1200 r/min.  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATORS 567  % Firs t , in itia lize  v_ t = 250;  the values n eeded in this program.  % T e rminal vo ltage (V)  r_ 0  i 0 - n_ o  0 0.08;  0 1 0,1 0,300;  0 25;  % Armature + fie ld resi stance (ohm s)  % Armature (line) c urre nts (A) 
 % Numb e r o f series turns o n fie ld  % Ca l culate the MMF fo r each l oad  f=n_s *i_a;  % Ca l culate the inte rnal generated vo ltage e_a .  e_a = v_ t - i _a * r_a;  % C a l culate the r esulting interna l generated vo ltage at  % 1 200 r /min by inte rpolating the m o t o r 's ma g n e tizatio n  % curve.  e_aO = inte rpl(mmf _va lues,ea_values,f ,'spline');  % Ca l culate the motor's speed from Equati o n (9-13) .  n = (e_a .1 e_aO) * n_O;  % Ca l culate the induced t o rque correspondi
ng t o each  % speed fro m Equations (8- 55 ) and (8- 56 ) .  t_ ind = e_a .* i_a .1 (n * 2 * p i I 60);  % Plo t the to rque - speed curve  p lo t (t_ ind, n , 'Co lo r' , 'k' , 'LineW idth', 2 .0) ;  h o ld o n;  x label (' \ tau_ {ind) (N-m ) ', ' F o ntwe ight ' , 'So ld') ;  y label (' \ itn_ {m) \nn \bf (r Imin ) , , 'Fo ntwe ight ' , 'So ld') ;  title ('Se ries IX: M o t o r T o rque - Speed C harac t e ris tic ',  'Fo nt we ight , , 'So ld') ;  axi s( [ 0 700 0 5000 ] );  grid o n;  h o 
ld o ff;  The resulting motor torque-speed characteristic is shown in Figure 9-23. Notice the  severe overspeeding at very small torques.  Speed Control of Series DC Motors  Unlike with the shunt dc m otor, there is only one efficient way to change the  speed of a series dc m otor. Th at m ethod is to change the terminal voltage of the  m otor. If the terminal voltage is increased, the first term in Equation (9-23) is in­ creased, resulting in a higher speed for any given torque.  The speed of s
eries dc m otors can also be controlled by the insertion of a se­ ries resistor into the m otor circuit, but this technique is very wasteful of power and  is used only for intennittent periods during the start-up of some m otors.  Until the last 40 years or so, there was no convenient way to change VT , so  the only m ethod of speed control available was the wasteful series resistance  m ethod. That has all changed today w ith the introduction of solid-state control  circuits. Techniques of obta
ining variable terminal voltages were discussed in  Chapter 3 and will be considered further later in this chapter.  568 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  5(XX)  4500  4(xx)  3500  " 3(xx)  ~ 2500  • " 2(xx)  1500  I(xx)  500  00 100 2lXl 3O\l 400 '00 6\lll 700  fiDd·N ·m  ""GURE 9-23  The torque-speed characteristic of the series dc motor in Ex ample 9--5.  9.7 TH E C OMPO U ND E D D C MO TOR  A compounded dc motor is a motor with both a shunt and a seriesfield. Such a m o­ tor is shown in Fig
ure 9-24. The dots that appear on the two field coils have the  sam e meaning as the dots on a transfonner: Cu"ent flowing into a dot produces a  positive magnetonwtive force. If current flows into the dots on both field coils, the  resulting ma gnetomotive forces add to produce a larger total ma gnetomotive force.  This situation is know n as cumulative compounding. If current flows into the dot on  one field coil and out of the dot on the other field coil, the resulting ma gnetomotive  forces 
subtract. In Figure 9-24 the round dots correspond to cumulative compound­ ing of the m otor, and the squares correspond to differential comp ounding.  1lle Kirchhoff's voltage law equation for a compound ed dc motor is  Vr = E), + f),(R), + Rs)  1lle currents in the compound ed m otor are related by  fA= IL - 1F  VT fF = -RF  (9-24)  (9-25)  (9-26)  1lle net ma gnetomotive force and the effective shunt field current in the com­ pounded motor are given by  ,nd  ~-~~-~  I 9i'oet - 9i'F ~ 9i'SE 9i
'AR I (9-27)  (9-28)  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 569  (b'  FIGURE 9-24  The equiva.lent circuit of contpounded dc motors: (a.) Ions-shunt connection: (b) shon-shunt  connection.  where the positive sign in the equations is associated with a cumulatively com­ pounded m otor and the negative sign is associated with a differentially com­ pounded m otor.  The Torque-Speed Characteristic of a  Cumulatively Compounded DC Motor  In the cumulatively compound ed dc motor, there is a component of flux which
 is  constant and another compon ent which is proportional to its annature current (and  thus to its load). TIlerefore, the cumulatively comp ounded m otor has a higher  starting torque than a shunt m otor (wh ose flux is constant) but a lower starting  torque than a series m otor (wh ose entire flux is proportional to armature current).  In a sense, the cumulatively compound ed dc motor combines the best fea­ tures of both the shunt and the series m otors. Like a series m otor, it has extra  to
rque for starting; like a shunt m otor, it does not overspeed at no load.  At light loads, the series field has a very small effect, so the m otor behaves  approximately as a shunt dc m otor. As the load gets very large, the series flux  570 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  "m'  rhnin  Shunt  Cumulatively  compounded  ,~- Series  L _______ ~ _______ _ fjnd  ,,'  ,~_ Shunt  Cumulatively  compounded  ~----=:::::::=L._ ,~  ,b,  ""GURE 9-25  (a) The torque-speed characteristic of a cumulatively comp
ounded dc motor compared to series and  shunt motors with the same full-load rating. (b) The torque-speed characteristic of a cumulatively  compounded dc motor compared to a shunt motor with the same no-lood speed.  becomes quite imp ortant and the torque-speed curve begins to look like a series  m otor's characteristic. A comparison of the torque-speed characteristics of each  of these types of ma chines is show n in Figure 9-25.  To detennine the characteristic curve ofa cumulatively compounde
d dc m o­ tor by nonlinear analysis, the approach is similar to that for the shunt and series  m otors seen before. Such an analysis will be illustrated in a later example.  The Torque-Speed Characteristic of a  Differentially Compounded DC Motor  In a differentially compound ed dc m otor, the shunt magne tomotive force and se­ ries magnetomotive force subtract from each other. This mean s that as the load on  the m otor increases, lit increases and the flux in the motor decreases. But as the  f
lux decreases, the speed of the m otor increases. This speed increase causes an­ other increase in load, which further increases lit, further decreasing the flux, and  increasing the speed again. Th e result is that a differentially compounded m otor is  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 57 1  H GU R E 9-26  The torque-speed characteristic of a  L _____________ fjmd differentially compounded dc motor.  unstable and tends to run away. T his instability is much worse than that of a shunt  m otor with armat
ure reaction. It is so bad that a differentially compounded motor  is unsuitable for any application.  To mak e matters w orse, it is impossible to start such a motor. At starting con­ ditions the annature current and the series field current are very high. Since the se­ ries flux subtracts from the shunt flux, the series field can actually reverse the ma g­ netic polarity of the ma chine's poles. T he m otor will typically remain still or turn  slow ly in the wrong direction while burning up, b
ecause of tile excessive annature  current. When this type of m otor is to be started, its series field mu st be short­ circuited, so that it behaves as an ordinary shunt m otor during the starting perioo.  Because of the stability problems of the differentially compounded de motor,  it is almost never intentionally used. H oweve r, a differentially compound ed m otor  can result if the direction of power flow reverses in a cumulatively compound ed  generator. For that reason, if cumulatively co
mpound ed dc generators are used to  supply power to a system, they will have a reverse-power trip circuit to disconnect  them from the line if the power flow reverses. N o m otor-generator set in which  power is expected to flow in both directions can use a differentially comp ounded  m otor, and therefore it cannot use a cumulatively compounded generator.  A typical terminal characteristic for a differentially comp ounded dc motor  is show n in Figure 9-26.  Th e N onlinear A nalysis of  Co mp
 ound ed DC M otors  T he determination of the torque and speed of a compounded dc m otor is illus­ trated in Example 9--6.  EXllmpl e 9-6. A lOO-hp, 250-V compounded dc motor with compen sating wind­ ings has an internal resistance, including the series winding, of 0.04 O. There are J(X)O  turns per pole on the shunt field and 31lU1lS per pole on the series winding. The machine is  shown in Figure 9-27, and its magnetization curve is shown in Figure 9-9. At no load, the  field resistor has been
 adjusted to make the motor run at 1200 r/min. The core, mechanical,  and stray losses may be neglected.  572 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  O.04n  <  L,  N F = ](XXl turns per pole  ••  • Cumulatively  compounded  • Differentially  compounded  V r= 250 V  ""GURE 9-27  The compounded dc motor in Exampl e 9--6.  (a) What is the shunt field current in this machine al no load?  (b) If the motor is cumulatively com pOlUlded, find its speed when I}, = 200 A.  (c) If the motor is differentially c
ompounded, find its speed when I}, = 200 A.  Solutioll  (a) Al no load, the armature ClUTent is zero, so the internal generated vollage of the  motor mu st equal Vr, which mean s that it mu st be 250 V. From the magnetiza­ tion curve, a field current of 5 A will produce a vollage E}, of 250 V at 1200  r/min. Therefore, the shlUll field ClUTent must be 5 A.  (b) When an armature ClUTent of 200 A flows in the motor, the machine's internal  generated vollage is  E}, = Vr - I},(R}, + R s)  = 250 V -
 (200 A )(0.04fi) = 242 V  The effective field clUTenl of this cumulatively compolUlded motor is  • A\;E ~AR  IF = IF + HI}, - N (9-28)  F ,  3 = 5A + I ()(X) 200 A = 5.6A  From the magnetization curve, E},o = 262 V at speed no = 1200 r/min. There­ fore, the motor's speed will be  E, n = - n" E"  242 V .  = 262 V 1200 rlnnn = 1108 rlmin  (c) If the machine is differentially compounded, the effective field current is  • NSE '3'AR  IF = IF - NF I}, - NF (9-28)  3 = 5A - 1000 200 A = 4.4 A  rx: MmD
RS AND GENERATORS 573  From the magnetization curve, EA O = 236 V at speed fit! = 1200 r/min. There­ fore, the motor's speed will be  E,  n=rno  "  = ~~ ~ 1200 r/min = 1230 r/min  Notice that the speed of the cumulatively compounded motor decreases with load, while  the speed of the differentially compounded motor increases with load.  Speed Co ntrol in the Cumul atively  Co mp ounded DC M otor  T he techniques available for the control of speed in a cumulatively compound ed  dc m otor are the s
ame as those available for a shunt m otor:  I. Chan ge the field resistance RF .  2_ Chan ge the armature voltage VA'  3. Chan ge the armature resistance RA .  Th e arguments describing the effects of changing RF or VA are very similar to the  argument s given earlier for the shunt motor.  T heoretically, the differentially compounded dc m otor could be controlled  in a similar manner. Since the differentially comp ounded motor is almost never  used, that fact hardly matters.  9.8 D C MOTOR STA 
RT E R S  In order for a dc m otor to function properly on the job, it mu st have some special  control and protection equipment associated with it. T he purposes of this equip­ m ent are  I. To protect the motor against damage due to short circuits in the equipment  2_ To protect the motor against damage from long-tenn overloads  3. To protect the motor against damage from excessive starting currents  4. To provide a convenient mann er in which to control the operating speed of  the motor  T he
 first three functions will be discussed in this section, and the fourth function  will be considered in Section 9.9.  D C M otor Problem s on Starting  In order for a dc motor to function properly, it mu st be protected from physical  dama ge during the starting period. At starting conditions, the m otor is not turning,  and so EA = 0 V. Since the internal resistance of a normal dc motor is very low  574 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  o.osn R.~ I, I,  +  R,  IA 2A 3A  R.,  + 1'1 R, V, E,  L, 
 ""GURE 9-28  A shunt motor with a starting resistor in series with its annature. Contacts lA. 2A. and 3A short·  circuit portions of the starting resistor w hen they close.  compared to its size (3 to 6 percent per unit for m edium·size m otors), a very high  current flow s.  C onsider, for example, the 50·hp, 250·Y m otor in Example 9-1. This m otor  has an armature resistance Rio. of 0.06 n, and a full·load current less than 200 A ,  but the current on starting is  VT - EA  RA  _ 250 Y -O Y =
4 167A  0.060  lllis current is over 20 times the m otor's rated full·load current. It is possible for  a motor to be severely dama ged by such currents, even if they last for only a  mom ent.  A solution to the problem of excess current during starting is to insert a  starting resistor in series with the annature to limit the current flow until EIo. can  build up to do the limiting. This resistor mu st not be in the circuit pennanently, be·  cause it w ould result in excessive losses and w ould
 cause the m otor's  torque-speed characteristic to drop off excessively with an increase in load.  1l1erefore, a resistor mu st be inserted into the annature circuit to limit cur·  rent flow at starting, and it mu st be removed again as the speed of the m otor builds  up. In mooem practice, a starting resistor is mad e up of a series of pieces, each of  which is removed from the m otor circuit in succession as the motor speeds up, in  order to limit the current in the m otor to a safe value whi
le never reducing it to too  Iowa value for rapid acceleration.  Figure 9-28 show s a shunt m otor with an extra starting resistor that can be  cut out of the circuit in segm ents by the closing of the lA, 2A, and 3A contacts.  Tw o actions are necessary in order to make a working m otor starter. Th e first is to  pick the size and number of resistor segm ents necessary in order to limit the  starting current to its desired bounds. The second is to design a control circuit that  rx: MmDRS AND GE
NERATORS 575  3  Off R."  f----~+  v,  FIGU R E 9-29  A manual de motor starter.  shuts the resistor bypass contacts at the proper time to rem ove those parts of the  resistor from the circuit.  Some older de m otor starters used a continuous starting resistor which was  gradually cut out of the circuit by a person moving its handle (Figure 9-29). nlis  type of starter had problems, as it largely depended on the person starting the m o­ lar not to mov e its handle too quickly or too slowly. Irth
e resistance were cut out  too quickly (before the motor could speed up enough), the resulting current flow  would be too large. On the other hand, if the resistance were cut out too slowly, the  starting resistor could burn up. Since they depended on a person for their correct op­ eration, these motor starters were subject to the problem of human error. 1lley have  almost entirely been displaced in new installations by automatic starter circuits.  Example 9-7 illustrates the selection of the si
ze and number of resistor seg­ m ents needed by an automatic starter circuit. T he question of the timing required  to cut the resistor segm ents out of the annature circuit will be examined later.  EXllmpl e 9-7. Figure 9-28 shows a lOO-hp. 250-V. 350-A shunt dc motor with an  armature resistance of 0.05 O. It is desired to design a starter circuit for this motor which  will limit the maximum starting current to twice its rated value and which will sw itch out  sections of resistance as the arm
ature current falls to its rated value.  (a) H ow many stages of starting resistance will be required to limit the current to  the range specified?  (b) What must the value of each segment of the resistor be? At what voltage should  each stage of the starting resistance be cut out?  Solutioll  (a) The starting resistor mu st be selected so that the current flow equals twice the  rated current of the motor when it is first connected to the line. A s the motor  starts to speed up. an internal gene
rated voltage EA will be produced in the  576 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  m otor. Since this voltage opposes the terminal voltage of the m otor, the increas­ ing internal generated voltage decreases the current flow in the m otor. Wh en the  current flow ing in the m otor falls to rated current, a section of the starting resis­ tor mu st be taken out to increase the starting ClUTent back up to 200 percent of  rated current. A s the m otor continues to speed up, EA continues to rise and th
e  annature current continues to fall. Wh en the current flowing in the motor falls  to rated current again, another section of the starting resistor mu st be taken out.  This process repeats lUltil the starting resistance to be removed at a given stage  is less than the resistance of the m otor's annature circuit. At that point, the m o­ tor's annature resistance w ill limit the current to a safe value all by itself.  H ow m any steps are required to accomplish the current limiting? To find out
,  define R'rA as the original resistance in the starting circuit. So R'rA is the sum of  the resistance of each stage of the starting resistor together with the resistance of  the armature circuit of the m otor:  + R, (9-29)  N ow define R'rA.i as the total resistance left in the starting circuit after stages I to  i have been shorted out. Th e resistance left in the circuit after rem oving stages  I through i is  + R,  N ote also that the initial starting resistance mu st be  V, R,<J, = -1- m 
..  (9-30)  In the first stage of the starter circuit, resistance R I mu st be sw itched out of  the circuit wh en the current I.It falls to  VT - EA  fA = R = fmin ,.  After sw itching that part of the resistance out, the annature current mu st jump to  VT - EA  R = fm:lx ,<J,.l  fA =  Since E,It (= Kef-) is directly proportional to the speed of the m otor, which can­ not change instantaneously, the quantity VT- E,It mu st be constant at the instant  the resistance is sw itched out. Therefore, 
 frrm,R'rA = VT - E,It = fmn R,ot.l  or the resistance left in the circuit after the first stage is switched out is  fmin  = -I -R~  - (9-31)  B y direct extension, the resistance left in the circuit after the nth stage is  switched out is  (9-32)  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 577  The starting process is completed when R'<AJI for stage n is less than or equal to  the internal annature resistance RA of the motor. At that point, RA can limit the  ClUTent to the desired value all by itself. At the bou
ndary where RA = R,OC,II  (9--33)  R, = ('m'")" RkJ! lmIlJ. (9--34)  Solving for n yields  (9--35)  where n mu st be rounded up to the next integer value, since it is not possible to  have a fractional number of starting stages. If n has a fractional part, then when  the final stage of starting resistance is removed, the armature current of the mo­ tor will jwnp up to a value smaller than lmu .  In this particular problem, the ratio lminllr=. = 0.5, and RIOt is  VT 250 V  R~ - -, - = 700 A = 0.3
57 n  m n  log (RAiR,,J log (0.05 fIA).357 fi)  n= = =2 84 log (lmin1Imax) log (350 MOO A) .  The number of stages required will be three.  (b) The annature circuit will contain the annature resistor RA and three starting re­ sistors R I, R2, and RJ. This arrangement is shown in Figure 9--28.  At first, EA = 0 V and IA = 700 A, so  _ Vr _  IA - R + R + R + R - 700 A A I 2 J  Therefore, the total resistance mu st be  (9--36)  This total resistance will be placed in the circuit WItii the ClUTent f
alls to 350 A.  This occurs when  EA = Vr - IAR,,,, = 250 V - (350 AX0.357 !l) = 125 V  When EA = 125 V,IA has fallen to 350 A and it is time to cut out the first starting  resistor R I. When it is cut out, the ClUTent should jump back to 7ooA. Therefore,  R + R + R = Vr - EA = 250 V - 125 V = 0 1786 n  A 2 J I 700 A . mn  (9--37)  This total resistance will be in the circuit untillA again falls to 350A. This  occurs when EA reaches  EA = Vr - IAR,,,, = 250 V - (350A)(0.1786!l) = 187.5 V  578 EL
ECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  When EA = 187.5 V, fA has fallen to 350 A and it is time to cut out the second  starting resistor R2. When it is cut out, the current should jump back to 700 A.  Therefore,  R +R = VT -EA =250V-187.5V =008930  A 1 I 700 A .  ~  (9-38)  This total resistance will be in the circuit until fA again falls to 350 A. This  occurs when EA reaches  EA = VT - fAR,o< = 250V - (350A)(0.08930) = 218.75V  When EA = 218.75 V, fA has fallen to 350 A and it is time to cut out the t
hird  starting resistor R1. When it is cut out, only the internal resistance of the motor  is left. By now, though, RA alone can limit the motor's current to  VT - EA 250 V - 218.75 V  lAo = R = 0.050 ,  = 625 A (less than allowed maximrun)  From this point on, the motor can speed up by itself.  From Equations (9-34) to (9-36), the required resistor values can be  calculated:  R J = R'OI.3 - RA = 0.08930 - 0.05 0 = 0.03930  R2 = R'0I2 - R J - RA = 0.1786 0 - 0.0393 0 - 0.05 0 = 0.0893 0  R ] = R
"".l - R2 - R3 - RA = 0.357 0 - 0.1786 0 - 0.0393 0 - 0.05 0 = 0.1786 0  And R J, R l., and RJ are cut out when EA reaches 125, 187.5, and 2 18.75 V,  respectively.  DC Motor Starting Circuits  Once the starting resistances have been selected, how can their shorting contacts  be controlled to ensure that they shut at exactly the correct m om ent? Several dif­ ferent schem es are used to accomplish this sw itching, and tw o of the m ost com­ m on approaches will be examined in this section. Befor
e that is done, though, it is  necessary to intrrxluce som e of the compon ents used in m otor-starting circuits.  Fig ure 9-30 illustrates som e of the devices comm only used in m otor­ control circuits. 1lle devices illustrated are fuses, push button sw itches, relays,  time delay relays, and overloads.  Fig ure 9-30a shows a symb ol for a fuse. Th e fuses in a m otor-control cir­ cuit serve to protect the m otor against the danger of short circuits. T hey are placed  in the power supply lines
 leading to m otors. If a m otor develops a short circuit, the  fuses in the line leading to it wi ll burn out, opening the circuit before any damage  has been done to the m otor itself.  Figure 9-30b shows spring-type push button sw itches. The re are two basic  types of such sw itches-normally open and nonnally shut. Nonnally open con­ tacts are open when the button is resting and closed when the button has been  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 579  -~o O~-- 0 1 0  Normally open Norm ally closed  ,,'
  FIGU RE 9-30  1  T  ,b,  Norm ally Nonnally  open closed  ,d,  O L  H eater  , .,  (a) A fuse. (b) Norm ally open and normally closed push button switches. (c) A relay coil and  comacts. (d) A time delay relay and contacts. (e) An overload and its normally closed contacts.  pushed, while normally closed contacts are closed when the button is resting and  open when the button has been pushed.  A relay is shown in Figure 9-30c. It consists of a main coil and a number of  contacts.1lle main coil 
is symbolized by a circle, and the contacts are show n as par­ allel1ines. TIle contacts are of two types- nonnally open and nonnally closed. A  normally open contact is one which is open when the relay is deenergized, and a  normally closed contact is one which is closed when the relay is deenergized. When  electric power is applied to the relay (the relay is energized), its contacts change  state: 1lle nonnally open contacts close, and the nonnally closed contacts open.  A time delay relay is 
show n in Figure 9-3Od . It behaves exactly like an or­ dinary relay except that when it is energized there is an adjustable time delay be­ fore its contacts change state.  An overload is show n in Figure 9-30e. It consists ofa heater coil and some  nonnally shut contacts. Th e current flow ing to a m otor passes through the heater  coils. If the load on a motor becomes too large, then the current flow ing to the m o­ tor wi 11 heat up the heater coils, which will cause the normally shut contact
s of the  overload to open. TIlese contacts can in turn activate some types of motor protec­ tion circuitry.  One common m otor-starting circuit using these components is show n in Fig­ ure 9-3 1. In this circuit, a series of time delay relays shut contacts which remove  each section of the starting resistor at approximately the correct time after power is  580 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  1 1  F, F,  R .. R, L,  FL  E,  M R"., M  + - OL  F, lID 2TD 3TO F,  SO",  ~  Srop  I  0 J  ,  FL 
OL  lID  M  2ID  ITO  3ID  2TO  ""GURE 9-31  A dc motor starting circuit rising time delay relays to cut out the starting resistor.  applied to the motor. When the start button is pushed in this circuit, the m otor's ar­ mature circuit is connected to its power supply, and the ma chine starts with all re­ sistance in the circuit. H owever, relay ITO energizes at the sam e time as the m otor  starts, so after some delay the ITO contacts will shut and remove part of the start­ ing resistance from 
the circuit. Simultaneously, relay 2m is energized, so after an­ other time delay the 2TD contacts wil I shut and remove the second part of the tim­ ing resistor. Wh en the 2T D contacts shut, the 3TD relay is energized, so the process  repeats again, and finally the m otor runs at full speed with no starting resistance  present in its circuit. I fthe time delays are picked properly, the starting resistors can  be cut out at just the right times to limit the motor's current to its design values.
  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 581  +  I I  Radj  O L  S"rt  FL O L ~ Stop  ~ J~I Or------{0  M  IA }---1  IAR  ~-j~---------{ 2A }---1  2AR  3A R  ~-Ie---------~ 3A }--~  FIGU R E 9-32  (a) A de motor starting circuit using oountervoltage-sensing relays to eut out the starting resistor.  Another type of motor starter is show n in Figure 9-32. H ere, a series of re­ lays sense the value of Ell in the m otor and cut out the starting resistance as Ell  rises to preset levels. T his type of starter is 
better than the previous one, since if  the m otor is loaded heavily and starts m ore slow ly than normal, its armature re­ sistance is still cut out when its current falls to the proper value.  N otice that both starter circuits have a relay in the field circuit labeled FL.  T his is afield loss relay. If the field current is lost for any reason, the field loss  582 ELECTR IC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I,  I A 2A 3 A 700 A k----'T'----~T----"-''------ "  I, I,  ,b,  ""GURE 9-32 (conclud ... >d)  (
b) The armature current in a dc motor during starting.  relay is deenergized, which turns off pow er to the M relay. When the M relay  deenergizes, its nonnally open contacts open and disconnect the m otor from the  pow er supply. This relay prevents the m otor from running away if its field current  is lost.  Notice also that there is an overload in each motor-starter circuit. If the  pow er drawn from the m otor become s excessive, these overloads will heat up and  open the O L nonnally shut c
ontacts, thus turning off the M relay. When the M re­ lay deenergizes, its nonnally open contacts open and disconnect the m otor from  the power supply, so the m otor is protected against dama ge from prolonged ex­ cessive loads.  9.9 THE WARD·LEONARD SYSTEM AND  SOLID·STATE SPEED C ONTROLLERS  TIle speed of a separately excited, shunt, or comp ounded dc m otor can be varied  in one of three way s: by changing the field resistance, changing the annature volt­ age, or changing the armature resist
ance. Of these m ethods, perhaps the m ost use­ ful is annature voltage control, since it permits wide speed variations without af­ fecting the m otor's maximum torque.  A number of motor-control system s have been developed over the years to  take advantage of the high torques and variable speeds available from the anna­ ture voltage control ofdc m otors. In the days before solid-state electronic compo­ nents becam e available, it wa s difficult to produce a varying dc voltage. In fact,  the no
nnal way to vary the armature voltage of a dc motor wa s to provide it with  its own separate dc generator.  An armature voltage control system of this sort is shown in Figure 9-33.  TIlis figure show s an ac m otor serving as a prime mov er for a dc generator, which  rx: M mD R S A ND G ENE RATO R S 583  IX generator rx: motor  R" I" I" R"  + +  wm  E" v" Vn E"  Th ree-phase motor  (induction or  synchronous)  Rn Ln Rn Ln  In I In I  Three-phase rectifier Th ree-phase rectifier  and control cir
cuit and control circuit  (a)  + - Switch to , , ' IX "" reverse power >'  connections ' ' , '  weroutput  + - D, D, D,  D, D, D.  Th ree-phase input power  ,b,  FIG U R E 9-33  (a) A Ward-Leonard system for dc motor speed control. (b) The circuit for producing field current in  the dc generator and dc motor.  in turn is used to supply a dc voltage to a dc m otor. Such a system of machines is  called a W ard-Leonard system, and it is extrem ely versatile.  In such a m otor-control system , the a
nn ature voltage of the m otor can be  controlled by varying the field current of the dc generator. T his ann ature voltage  584 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Generator operation  (r reversed and ro normal)  - rind  Motor operation  (both rand ro reversed)  ""GURE 9-34  Motor operation  (normal r andro)  Torque-speed curves  Generator operation  (r normal and ro reversed)  The operating range of a Ward-Leonan:l motor-control system. The motor can operate as a motor in  either the forward (q
uadram 1) or reverse (quadrant 3) direction and it can also regenerate in  quadrams 2 and 4.  allows the m otor's speed to be sm oothly varied between a very small value and  the base speed. Th e speed of the motor can be adjusted above the base speed by  reducing the m otor's field current. With such a flexible arrangement, total m otor  speed control is possible.  Furthermore, if the field current of the generator is reversed, then the polar­ ity of the generator's annature voltage will be rev
ersed, too. This will reverse the  motor's direction of rotation. Therefore, it is possible to get a very wide range of  speed variations in either direction of rotation out of a Ward-L eonard dc m otor­ control system.  Another advantage of the Ward-Leonard system is that it can "regenerate,"  or return the ma chine's energy of motion to the supply lines. If a heavy load is  first raised and then lowered by the dc mot or ofa Ward-Leonard system , when the  load is falling, the dc m otor acts as
 a generator, supplying power back to the  power system. In this fashion, mu ch of the energy required to lift the load in the  first place can be recovered, reducing the ma chine's overall operating costs.  TIle possible mod es of operation of the dc ma chine are show n in the  torque-speed diagram in Figure 9-34. When this m otor is rotating in its nonnal  direction and supplying a torque in the direction of rotation, it is operating in the  first quadrant of this figure. If the generator's fi
eld current is reversed, that will re­ verse the tenninal voltage of the generator, in turn reversing the m otor's annature  voltage. When the armature voltage reverses with the m otor field current remain­ ing unchanged, both the torque and the speed of the motor are reversed, and the  ma chine is operating as a motor in the third quadrant of the diagram. If the torque  or the speed alone of the m otor reverses w hile the other quantity does not, then the  ma chine serves as a generator, return
ing power to the dc power system. Because  rSC R ]  Th~  r ph= SCR.,  input  FIGU R E 9-35  lr SCR 2  l,- SCR~  I I  I,  Operation  "0'  possible  lr SCR J  V-SC~  (.,  (b,  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 585  ,Free- wheeling  diode)  D,  v,  K.  Operation  "oj  possible  +  I  v, E,C)  - (a) A two-quadrant solid-state dc motor controller. Since current cannot flow out of the positive  terminals of the armature. this motor cannot act as a generator. returning power to the system.  (b) The possible ope
rating quadrants of this motor controller.  a Ward-Leonard system pennits rotation and regeneration in either direction, it is  called afour-quadrant control system.  T he disadvantages of a Ward-Leonard system should be obvious. One is that  the user is forced to buy three full ma chines of essentially equal ratings, which is  quite expensive. Another is that three ma chines will be mu ch less efficient than  one. Because of its expense and relatively low efficiency, the Ward-Leonard sys­ tem h
as been replaced in new applications by SCR-based controller circuits.  A simp le dc armature voltage controller circuit is show n in Figure 9-35.  T he average voltage applied to the armature of the motor, and therefore the aver­ age speed of the motor, depends on the fraction of the time the supply voltage is  applied to the armature. T his in turn depends on the relative phase at which the  586 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  -. Th  ph  inp '" m  t I  "  -Generator  (regeneration) -...  ""
GURE 9-36  (a)  ,b,  V +\  V, E,  _I  Motor  Generator  __ (regeneration)  - I'  +  - (a) A four-quadrant solid-state dc motor controller. (b) Th e possible operating quadrants of this  motor controller.  SCRs in the rectifier circuit are triggered. This particular circuit is only capable of  supplying an annature voltage with one polarity, so the m otor can only be re­ versed by sw itching the polarity of its field connection. Notice that it is not possi­ ble for an annature current to now out 
the positive terminal of this m otor, since  current cannot now backward through an SCR. nlerefore, this m otor cannot re­ generate, and any energy supplied to the m otor cannot be recovered. This type of  control circuit is a two-quadrant controller, as shown in Figure 9-35b.  A more advanced circuit capable of supplying an annature voltage with ei­ ther polarity is shown in Figure 9-36. nlis annature voltage control circuit can  rx:  MmDR S  AND  GENERATORS  587  (a)  FIGURE 9-37  (a) A typica
l solid-state shunt  dc  motor drive.  (Courtesy  of  MagneTek,  Inc. )  (b) A close-up view  of  the low-power electronics circuit board. showing the adjustmems for current limits. acceleration rate.  deceleration rate. minimum speed. and maximum speed.  (Courtesy  of  M agneTel;. Inc.)  pennit a curre nt  fl ow o ut  of  the positive terminals of the generator, so a m otor  with this type of co nt ro ll er can regenerate. If the polarity  of  the m otor  fi e ld  circ uit  can  be  sw it ched 
as well, then the solid-state circuit is a  full  four-quadrant con­ t ro ller like the W ard-Leona rd  syste m.  A two-quadra nt  or a  full  four-quadrant controller built with SCRs is cheaper  than the two extra complete m achines needed for the W a rd - Le ona rd  system , so  so lid -s tate speed-co nt ro l system s ha ve  largely displaced W ard- Le onard systems  in  new applications.  A typical two-quadrant shunt  dc  m otor drive with armature  vo ltage speed  control is show n  in  Fi 
gure  9- 37,  a nd  a simplified block diagram of the drive is  show n  in  Fi gure  9- 38 .  nli s drive has a consta nt  fi e ld  vo lt age supplied  by  a three­ phase  full -wave rectifier, a nd  a  va ri ab le  annature terminal  vo lt age supplied  by  six  SCRs arranged as a three-phase full-wave rectifier.  Th e voltage supplied to the ar­ m ature  of  th e m otor is co nt rolled  by  ad ju sting  the  firing angle of the SC R s  in  the  bridge. S in ce this m otor cont ro ller has a  f
ix ed  fi e ld  voltage and a variable ann a­ ture  vo ltage,  it  is  o nl y able to co nt ro l the speed  of  the m otor at speeds  le ss  th an or  equal to the base speed (see "C hang in g the Armature Voltage"  in  Sec ti on 9.4). Th e  contro ll er circ uit  is  id e nti cal with that show n  in  Fi gure  9-35,  except th at  a ll  of  the  co nt rol electronics and feedback circ uit s are show n.   ~  ~  : Pr~-;ct~~ci~i~ -----;l~~---: t- : (P rotective devices Current- 1  : tied to fault 
relay) In;~~ng !  : Sample foc 1  1 trips J L__________________ _  341 P()',\o"er  3-phase  , I Full-wave bridge ~I --,  (diodes)  Current feedback  Voc Sync voltage T 341 P()',\o"er  1------- Speed <: i Low-pow~;I.;;:;~~;T -~  adj ~ Ac celerutionl I I  : deceleration r-- s",,,,  regulator  Current  ---,  I  I  Firing I ! •  circuit r-r-: I--- I OC~_~ rx: motor  1 T hree-phase 1  full wave  SCR-bridge  M ain H  V  limiter  I  L --,- FlGURE 9-38  I  I  ____ I  T achometer speed feedback  contacts
  -----------------4---,  r-t~--r-~-- Start stop circuit  Fault  relay Run  -.l .:L I R" I -l---colf-t-T ~ re~a!  I ,  1 _____________ -.l  L ______________________________ _  I  T achometer  Shunt  field  A simplified block diagram of the t)pical solid-state shunt dc motoc drive shown in Figure 9--37. (Simplified/rom a block diagmm provided l7y MagneTek, Inc.)  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 589  Th e major sections of this dc motor drive include:  I. A protection circuit section to protect the motor
 from excessive armature cur­ rents. low tenninal voltage. and loss of field current.  2. A start/stop circuit to connect and disconnect the mot or from the line.  3. A high-pow er electronics section to convert three-phase ac power to dc power  for the m otor's annature and field circuits.  4. A low- power electronics section to provide firing pulses to the SCRs which  supply the annature voltage to the motor. This section contains several major  subsections, which will be described below.  Pro
tection Circuit Section  Th e protection circuit section combines several different devices which together  ensure the safe operation of the motor. Some typical safety devices included in  this type of drive are  I. Current-limiting fuses, to disconnect the motor quickly and safely from the  power line in the event of a short circuit within the m otor. Current-limiting  fuses can interrupt currents of up to several hundred thousand amperes.  2. An instantaneous static trip, which shuts down the 
motor if the annature cur­ rent exceeds 300 percent of its rated value. If the armature current exceeds  the maximum allowed value, the trip circuit activates the fault relay, which  deenergizes the run relay, opening the main contactors and disconnecting the  m otor from the line.  3. An inverse-time overload trip, which guards against sustained overcurrent  conditions not great enough to trigger the instantaneous static trip but large  enough to damage the m otor if allowed to continue indefin
itely. TIle term in­ verse time implies that the higher the overcurrent flow ing in the m otor, the  faster the overload acts (Fig ure 9-39). For exampl e, an inverse-time trip  might take a full minute to trip if the current flow were 150 percent of the  rated current of the m otor, but take 10 seconds to trip if the current now were  200 percent of the rated current of the m otor.  4. An undefi!oltage trip, which shuts down the m otor if the line voltage supply­ ing the m otor drops by m ore t
han 20 percent.  5. Afield loss trip, which shuts down the mot or if the field circuit is lost.  6. An overtemperature trip, which shuts down the m otor if it is in danger of  overheating.  StartlStop Circuit Section  Th e start/stop circuit section contains the controls needed to start and stop the m o­ tor by opening or closing the main contacts connecting the m otor to the line. Th e  m otor is started by pushing the run button, and it is stopped either by pushing the  590 ELECTR IC MAC HINER
Y RJNDAMENTALS  I  3/",oed  I",oed ---------------------------- "--':10'--- '2"0--30"'- --'40"- ':50'--- '60"--Trip time. s  ""GU R E 9-39  An inverse-time trip characteristic.  stop button or by energizing the fault relay. In either case, the run relay is deener­ gized, and the main contacts connecting the m otor to the line are opened.  High-Pow er Electronics Section  Th e high-pow er electronics section contains a three-phase full-wave diode recti­ fier to provide a constant voltage to the f
ield circuit of the m otor and a three-phase  full-wave SCR rectifier to provide a variable voltage to the annature circuit of the  m otor.  L ow-P ow er Electronics Section  TIle low-powe r electronics section provides firing pulses to the SCRs which sup­ ply the annature voltage to the m otor. B y adjusting the firing time of the SCRs,  the low-powe r electronics section adjusts the m otor's average armature voltage.  TIle low-power electronics section contains the follow ing subsystem s:  I. 
Speed regulation circuit. TIlis circuit mea sures the speed of the m otor with a  tachom eter, compare s that speed with the desired speed (a reference voltage  level), and increases or decreases the annature voltage as necessary to keep the  speed constant at the desired value. For exrunp le, suppose that the load on the  shaft of the m otor is increased. If the load is increased, then the m otor will  slow down. TIle decrease in speed wi II reduce the voltage generated by the  tachom eter, whi
ch is fed into the speed regulation circuit. Because the voltage  level corresponding to the speed of the m otor has fallen below the reference  voltage, the speed regulator circuit will advance the firing time of the SC R s,  producing a higher annature voltage. The higher armature voltage will tend to  increase the speed of the m otor back to the desired level (see Figure 9-40).  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 591  Speed adjustment potentiometer  +~,J  1--------1  -----' C' -_0 + + I I I Voltage I  
V .. r I I I regulator I  t--'~ c-' -~O -, ,  l ______ -.l  (V,oo:b ex speed) Tachometer rx: motor  ,.,  2  " ,  ,b,  FIGU RE 9-40  (a) The speed regulator cin:uit produces an output voltage which is proportional to the difference  between the desired speed of the motor (set by V <d') and the actual speed of the nx>tor (measured by  Vtoob). This output voltage is applied to the firing cin:uit in such a way that the larger the output  voltage becomes, the earlier the SCRs in the drive turn on and
 the higher the average terminal  voltage becomes. (b) The effect of increasing load on a shunt dc motor with a speed regulator. The  load in the nx>tor is increased. If no regulator were present. the motor would slow down and operate  at point 2. When the speed regulator is present. it detects the decrease in speed and boosts the  armature voltage of the motor to compensate. This raises the whole torque-speed characteristic  curve of the motor. resulting in operation at point 2'.  With proper d
esign, a circuit of this type can provide speed regulations of  0.1 percent between no-load and full-load conditions.  1lle desired operating speed of the motor is controlled by changing the ref­ erence voltage level. Th e reference voltage level can be adjusted with a small  potentiometer, as show n in Figure 9-40.  592 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  2. Current-limiting circuit. This circuit mea sures the steady-state current flow­ ing to the m otor, compares that current with the desired max
imum current  (set by a reference voltage level), and decreases the annature voltage as nec­ essary to keep the current from exceeding the desired maximum value. Th e  desired maximum current can be adjusted over a wide range, say from 0 to  200 percent or m ore of the m otor's rated current. This current limit should  typically be set at greater than rated current, so that the motor can accelerate  under full-load conditions.  3. A cceleration/deceleration circuit. TIlis circuit limits the acce
leration and de­ celeration of the m otor to a safe val UC. Whenev er a dramatic speed change is  commanded , this circuit intervenes to ensure that the transition from the orig­ inal speed to the new speed is sm ooth and does not cause an excessive anna­ ture current transient in the m otor.  TIle acceleration/deceleration circuit completely eliminates the need for a  starting resistor, since starting the m otor is just another kind of large speed  change, and the acceleration/deceleration circ
uit acts to cause a smooth increase  in speed over time. TIlis gradual sm ooth increase in speed limits the current flow­ ing in the ma chine's annature to a safe value.  9.10 D C MOTOR EFFICIENCY  CALCULATIO NS  To calcu late the efficiency of a dc motor, the following losses mu st be detennined:  I. C opper losses  2. Brush drop losses  3. M echanical losses  4. Core losses  5. Stray losses  TIle copper losses in the motor are the {2R losses in the armature and field  circuits of the m otor. T
he se losses can be found from a knowledge of the currents  in the ma chine and the two resistances. To determine the resistance of the anna­ ture circuit in a ma chine, block its rotor so that it cannot turn and apply a small dc  voltage to the armature tenninals. Adjust that voltage until the current flowing in  the annature is equal to the rated annature current of the ma chine. TIle ratio of the  applied voltage to the resulting armature current flow is Rio.' The reason that the  current sho
uld be about equal to full-load value when this test is done is that Rio.  varies with temperature, and at the full-load value of the current, the annature  windings will be near their normal operating temperature.  TIle resulting resistance will not be entirely accurate, because  I. Th e cooling that normally occurs when the m otor is spinning will not be  present.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 593  2. Since there is an ac voltage in the rotor conductors during nonnal operation,  they suffer from s
ome amount of skin effect, which further raises armature  resistance.  IEEE Standard 11 3 (Reference 5) deals with test procedures for dc ma chines. It  gives a more accurate procedure for determining RA , which can be used if needed.  Th e field resistance is detennined by supplying the full-rated field voltage  to the field circuit and mea suring the resulting field current. TIle field resistance  RF is just the ratio of the field voltage to the field current.  Brush drop losses are often appr
oximately lumped together with copper  losses. If they are treated separately, they can be detennined from a plot of contact  potential versus current for the particular type of brush being used. The brush drop  losses are just the product of the brush voltage drop VBO and the annature current IA .  Th e core and me chanical losses are usually detennined together. If a m otor  is allowed to tum freely at no load and at rated speed, then there is no output power  from the ma chine. Since the moto
r is at no load, IA is very small and the annature  copper losses are negligible. Th erefore, if the field copper losses are subtracted  from the input power of the m otor, the remaining input power mu st consist of the  m echanical and core losses of the ma chine at that speed. TIlese losses are called the  no-load rotational losses of the m otor. As long as the m otor's speed remains nearly  the same as it was when the losses were me asured, the no-load rotational losses are  a gD<Xl estimate 
of me chanical and core losses under load in the ma chine.  An example of the detennination of a m otor's efficiency is given below.  Exa m ple 9-8. A SO-hp. 2S0-V. 1200 rlmin shunt dc motor has a rated armature  current of 170 A and a rated field current of 5 A. When its rotor is blocked. an armature  voltage of 10.2 V (exclusive of brushes) produces 170 A of current flow. and a field volt­ age of2S0 V produces a field current flow of S A. The brush voltage drop is assumed to be  2 V. At no loa
d with the terminal voltage equal to 240 V. the annature current is equal to  13.2 A. the field current is 4.8 A. and the motor's speed is IISO r/min.  (a) How mu ch power is output from this motor at rated conditions?  (b) What is the motor's efficiency?  Solutioll  The armature resistance of this machine is approximately  RA = 10.2 V =006 0 170A .  and the field resistance is  R ~=2S0 V =50 0 , 5 A  Therefore, at full load the armature [2R losses are  PA = (l70A)2(0.06!l) = 1734 W  and the fie
ld circuit [2R losses are  594 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  PF = (SA:Y(500) = 12S0W  The brush losses at full load are given by  Pbtuob = VBofA = (2 V)(170A) = 340W  The rotational losses at full load are essentially equivalent to the rotational losses at no  load, since the no-load and full-load speeds of the motor do not differ too greatly. These  losses may be ascertained by detennining the input power to the armature circuit at no load  and assuming that the annature copper and brush d
rop losses are negligible, meaning that  the no-load armature input power is equal to the rotationa1losses:  P,ot. = POOl e + P _ = (240 VX13.2 A) = 3168W  (a) The input power of this motor at the rated load is given by  P~ = VrlL = (250VXI7SA) = 43,7S0W  Its output power is given by  P 00' = Pm - Pb<wb - P <:U - P <Ote - P 1DOC.b - P !MaY  = 43,7S0W - 340 W - 1734 W - 1250W - 3168W - (O.OIX43,750W)  = 36,82oW  where the stray losses are taken to be I percent of the input power.  (b) The efficie
ncy of this motor at full10ad is  T] = ~ou, x 100%  ~  _ 36,820W  - 43,7SoW x 100% = 84.2%  9.11 INTRODUCTION TO DC GENERATORS  DC generators are dc ma chines used as generators. As previously pointed out,  there is no real difference between a generator and a m otor except for the direc­ tion of power flow . Th ere are five major types of dc generators, classified accord­ ing to the mann er in which their field flux is produced:  I. Separately excited generator. In a separately excited generato
r, the field flux  is derived from a separate power source independent of the generator itself.  2. Shunt generator. In a shunt generator, the field flux is derived by connecting  the field circuit directly across the tenninals of the generator.  3. Series generator. In a series generator, the field flux is produced by connect­ ing the field circuit in series with the armature of the generator.  4. Cumulatively compounded generator. In a cumulatively comp ounded gener­ ator, both a shunt and a s
eries field are present, and their effects are additive.  S. D ifferentially compounded generator. In a differentially comp ounded genera­ tor, both a shunt and a series field are present, but their effects are subtractive.  TIlese vario us types of dc generators differ in their terminal (voJtage--current)  characteristics, and therefore in the applications to which they are suited.  rx:  MmDR S  AND  GENERATORS  595  FI GU RE 9-41  The first practical  dc  generator. This  is  an exact duplicat
e  of  the "long­ legged  M ary  Ann." Thomas Edison's  first commerdal dc generator. which  was built  in  1879. It was rated  at  5  kW.  100 V. and 1200 r/min.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  DC generators are comp ared  by  their voltages, power ratings, efficiencies,  a nd  vo ltage regulations.  Volta ge  regulation  (VR ) is defined  by  the equation  I  VR  =  V ol  ~  Va  x  100 %  I  (9-39)  where  V ..  is the  no- load tenninal voltage of  th e generator and V fI  is the fu
ll-load ter­ minal  vo lt age  of  the generato r.  It  is a rough  me asure  of  th e shape  of  the generator's  vo lta ge-c urre nt  characte ri stic-a  positive  vo lt age regulation m eans a drooping  characte ri stic, and a negative  vo lta ge regulation means a rising characte ri stic.  A ll  generators are driven  by  a source  of  me chanical power, which is usually  ca ll ed the  prime  nwver  of  the generator. A prime m over for a dc generator m ay  be  a steam turbine, a diesel eng 
in e, or even an e le ctric m otor. S in ce the speed  of  the  prime m over affects  th e output voltage  of  a generator, a nd  s in ce prime m overs can  vary widely  in  their speed characteris ti cs,  it  is customary to compare the  vo lt age  regulation a nd  output characte ri stics  of  different generators,  assum ing constant­ speed prime movers.  Th rougho ut  this chapter, a generat or's  speed  wi ll  be  assumed  to  be  constant unless a specific statem ent is mad e to the contra
ry.  DC generators are quite rare in m ode rn  power systems.  Ev en dc powe r sys­ tems such as those  in  automobiles now use ac generators p lu s rectifie rs  to produce  dc power.  Th e eq ui va le nt  c ir c uit  ofa  dc generator is show n in  Fi g ure  9-42, and a s im ­ plified version  of  the equivalent c ir c uit  is show n  in  Fi gure  9-4 3. The y look simi­ lar to the equivalent circuits  ofa  dc m otor, exce pt  that the direction  of  current  fl ow  and the brush loss are rever
sed.   596 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  ""GU R E 9-42  The equivalent ein:uit of a de generator.  v,  ""GU R E 9-43  I,  -~----AN .. V---A-;>, +  R,  v,  A simplified equivalent ein:uit of a de generator. with RF eombining the resistances of the field coils  and the variable control resistor.  9.12 THE SE PAR A TELY  E X C ITED G E N E R A TOR  A separately excited dc generator is a generator wh ose field current is supp lied by  a separate external dc voltage source. T he equivalent ci
rcuit of such a ma chine is  shown in Fig ure 9-44. In this circuit, the voltage VT represents the actual voltage  mea sured at the tenninals of the generator, and the current II. represents the cur­ rent flowing in the lines connected to the terminals. T he internal generated volt­ age is Ell, and the armature current is lit-It is clear that the annature current is  equal to the line current in a separately excited generator:  Th e Terminal C haracteristic of a Separately  Ex cited DC Gen erato
r  (9-40)  TIle terminnl characteristic of a device is a plot of the output quantities of the de­ vice versus each other. For a dc generator, the output quantities are its tenninal volt­ age and line current. llle tenninal characteristic of a separately excited generator is  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 597  I,  -,-----".fII'V--~+  + v,  FIGURE 9-44  A separately excited de generator.  thus a plot of VT versus IL for a constant speed w. By Kirchhoff's voltage law, the  terminal voltage is  (9-41)  S
ince the internal generated voltage is independent of lA, the tenninal characteris­ tic of the separately excited generator is a straight line, as show n in Figure 9-45a.  What happens in a generator of this sort when the load is increased? Wh en  the load supplied by the generator is increased, IL (and therefore IA) increases. As  the annature current increases, the lAR A drop increases, so the terminal voltage of  the generator falls.  This tenninal characteristic is not always entirely accura
te. In generators  without compen sating windings, an increase in IA causes an increase in armature  reaction, and armature reaction causes flux weakening. This flux weakening  causes a decrease in EA = K<p J..w which further decreases the tenninal voltage of  the generator. TIle resulting tenninal characteristic is show n in Figure 9-45b. In  all future plots, the generators will be assumed to have compen sating windings  unless stated otherwise. H owever, it is important to realize that annatu
re reaction  can modify the characteristics if compen sating windings are not present.  Co ntrol of Terminal Vo ltage  Th e tenninal voltage of a separately excited dc generator can be controlled by  changing the internal generated voltage EA of the ma chine. B y Kirchhoff's volt­ age law V T = EA - lARA, so if EA increases, V T will increase, and if EA decreases,  VT will decrease. Since the internal generated voltage EA is given by the equation  EA = K<pw , there are two possible ways to contr
ol the voltage of this generator:  I. Change the speed of rotation. If w increases, then EA = K<pwi increases, so  V T = EA i - lARA increases too.  598 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  V,  E, 1:::::::::::::::::=====I"R, drop  v,  "--------------------- ~  ,,'  ----------l"R'drop ----- ARdrop  "----------cc--------- ~ ,b,  FlGURE 9-45  The terminal characteristic of a  separately excited dc generator (a) with  and (b) without compensating  windings.  2. Change the field current. If RF is decreas
ed. then the field current increases  (IF = VF IR~) TIlerefore, the nu x <f.> in the ma chine increases. As the nux  rises, EA = K<f.>iw mu st rise too, so VT = EA i -lARA increases.  In many applications, the speed range of the prime mo ver is quite limited,  so the tenninal voltage is m ost comm only controlled by changing the field cur­ rent. A separately excited generator driving a resistive load is shown in Figure  9-46a. Figure 9-46b shows the effect of a decrease in field resistance on th
e ter­ minal voltage of the generator when it is ope rating under a load.  Nonlinear Analysis of a Separately Excited  DC Generator  B ecause the internal generated voltage of a generator is a nonlinear function of its  ma gnetom otive force, it is not possible to calculate simply the value of EA to be  expected from a given field current. TIle ma gnetization curve of the generator  mu st be used to accurately calculate its output voltage for a given input voltage.  In addition, if a ma chine ha
s armature reaction, its nux will be reduced with  each increase in load, causing EA to decrease. TIle only way to accurately deter­ mine the output voltage in a ma chine with annature reaction is to use graphical  analysis.  TIle total ma gnetomotive force in a separately excited generator is the field  circuit ma gnetomotive force less the ma gnetom otive force due to annature reac­ tion (AR ):  +  v,  FIGU R E 9-46  I,  v,  v' ,  R,  L,  (?- 1  (a)  V T --------"~"- \  'bJ  rx: MmDRS AND GENE
RATORS 599  R, I,  +  E, v, R~  (a) A separately excited de generator with a resistive load. (b) The effect of a decrease in field  resistance on the output voltage of the generator.  (9-42)  As with de m otors, it is customary to define an equivalent field current that would  produce the same output voltage as the combination of all the magnetomotive  forces in the ma chine. Th e resulting voltage EAO can then be detennined by locat­ ing that equivalent field current on the ma gnetization curve
. T he equivalent field  current of a separately excited de generator is given by  • "'AR IF=IF-N  F  (9-43)  Also, the difference between the speed of the ma gnetization curve and the  real speed of the generator mu st be taken into account using Equation (9-13):  EA _!!..  EAO no (9-13)  T he follow ing example illustrates the analysis of a separately excited de  generator.  600 ELECTR IC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  +  v" ..  I,  0.05.n  I,  0-300.\1 ~  +  20fi R, R,  VF ", 430 V  (+) E, V,  
NF",!()(Xlturns L,  ""G UR E 9-47  The separately excited dc generator in Example 9--9.  Exa m ple 9-9. A separately excited dc generator is rated at 172 kW . 430 V. 400 A.  and 1800 r/min.1t is show n in Figure 9-47. and its m agnetization curve is show n in Fig­ ure 9-48. This m achine has the follow ing characteristics:  RA = 0.05 n  RF = 20 n  R odj = O t03oo n  VF = 430V  N F = J()(X) turns per pole  (a) If the variable resistor R odj in this generator's field circuit is adjusted to 63 n an
d  the generator's prime m over is driving it at 1600 rlmin , w hat is this generator's  no-load tenninal voltage?  (b) Wh at wo uld its voltage be if a 360-A load we re connected to its tenninals? A s­ swn e that the generator has com pensating windings.  (c) Wh at wo uld its voltage be if a 360-A load we re connected to its terminals but  the generator does not have com pensating windings? Asswn e that its annature  reaction at this load is 450 A · turns.  (d) Wh at adjustment could be made to
 the generator to restore its tenninal voltage  to the value found in part a?  (e) H ow mu ch field current wo uld be needed to restore the terminal voltage to its  no-load value? (A ssum e that the ma chine has com pensating windings.) Wh at is  the required value for the resistor R ..Jj to accomplish this?  Solutio"  (a) If the generator's total field circuit resistance is  RF + R ..Jj = 83 n  then the field current in the m achine is  VF 430 V  IF = RF = 83 n = 5.2 A  From the m achine's m ag
netization curve, this mu ch current wo uld produce a  voltage EAO = 430 V at a speed of 1800 r/min. Since this generator is actually  turning at n .. = 1600 rlmin , its internal generated voltage EA w ill be  E, " = (9- 13)  500  450  430  410  400  300  200  100  o  II  rx: M mD R S A ND G ENE RATO R S 601  /'  /  V  0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 /5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0  4.75 5.2 6.15  Field current. A  N ote: When the field current is zero, E" is about 3 V.  FIG URE 9-48  The magnetization curve for 
the generator in Ex ample 9--9.  E = 1600 r/m~n 430 V = 382 V  " 1800 r/mm  Since Vr = E" at no-load conditions, the output voltage of the generator is Vr =  382 V.  (b) If a 360-A load we re cotUlected to this generator's terminals, the tenninal volt­ age of the generator wo uld be  Vr = E" - I"R" = 382 V - (360 A XO .05 0 ) = 364 V  (c) If a 360-A load were connected to this generator's termin als and the generator  had 450 A ° turns of armature reaction, the effective field current wo uld be 
 1* = I _ ~AR = S .2 A _ 450A o turns = 4 .75A  F F N F J(X)() turns  602 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  From the magnetization curve, EAO = 410 V, so the internal generated voltage at  1600 rlmin would be  = EAO no  E = 1600 r/m~n 410 V = 364 V  A 1800 r/mlll  Therefore, the tenninal voltage of the generator would be  Vr = EA - lARA = 364 V - (360 AXO.05 0) = 346 V  It is lower than before due to the annature reaction.  (9-13)  (d) The voltage at the tenninals of the generator has fallen, so 
to restore it to its  original value, the voltage of the generator mu st be increased. This requires an  increase in EA , which implies that R..tj must be decreased to increase the field  current of the generator.  (e) For the terminal voltage to go back up to 382 V, the required value of EA is  EA = Vr + lARA = 382 V + (360 AXO.05 0) = 400 V  To get a voltage EA of 400 V at n .. =  1800 rlmin would be  1600 rlmin, the equivalent voltage at  EA _ .!!. (9-13)  E = 18oor/m~n 400 V = 450 V  AO 1600
 r/mlll  From the magnetization curve, this voltage would require a field current of IF =  6.15 A. The field circuit resistance would have to be  V,  RF + Rad j = T ,  430V 200 + Rad j = 6.15A = (:f).90  Rad j = 49.90 - 500  Notice that, for the sam e field current and load current, the generator with  annature reaction had a lower output voltage than the generator without annature  reaction. Th e annature reaction in this generator is exaggerated to illustrate its ef­ fects- it is a good deal s
maller in well-designed modem ma chines.  9.13 T H E SH U N T D C GE N E R ATO R  A shunt dc generator is a de generator that supplies its ow n field current by hav­ ing its field connected directly across the terminals of the mac hine. Th e equi va­ lent circuit of a shunt dc generator is shown in Figure 9-49. In this circuit, the ar­ mature current of the ma chine supplies both the field circuit and the load attached  to the ma chine:  (9-44)  + E,  I,  " - R, "1  /.  IA = IF+h  V r= EA - lARA
  V, IF= - R,  I,  - v.,  L,  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 603  +  v,  HGURE 9-49  The equivalent circuit of a shunt de  generator.  Th e Kirchhoff's voltage law equation for the armature circuit of this ma chine is  (9-45)  This type of generator has a distinct advantage over the separately excited  dc generator in that no external power supply is required for the field circuit. But  that leaves an imp ortant question unanswe red: If the generator supplies its own  field current, how does it get th
e initial field nux to start wh en it is first turned on?  Vo ltage Build up in a Shunt Ge nerator  A ssume that the generator in Figure 9-49 has no load connected to it and that the  prime mov er starts to turn the shaft of the generator. H ow does an initial voltage  appear at the terminals of the ma chine?  Th e voltage buildup in a dc generator depends on the presence ofa residual  flux in the poles of the generator. Wh en a generator first starts to turn, an internal  voltage will be genera
ted which is given by  E A = K<P re.w  This voltage appears at the tenninals of the generator (it may only be a volt or  two). But when that voltage appears at the tenninals, it causes a current to flow in  the generator's field coil (IF = Vr i/R F). This field current produces a ma gneto­ motive force in the poles, which increases the nux in them. 1lle increase in nux  causes an increase in E A = K<p iw, which increases the terminal voltage Vr. Wh en  Vr rises, IF increases further, increasing 
the fl ux <p more, which increases E A, etc.  This voltage buildup behavior is shown in Figure 9-50. N otice that it is the  effect of ma gnetic saturation in the pole faces which eventually limits the termi­ nal voltage of the generator.  604 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  EA (and V T), V  v,.  VTv ersus IF EA versus IF  " \ --------------~--1""--?f__\\  Magnetization  curve  EA,res "------------~------ IF' A  IF"  ""GURE 9-50  Voltage buildup on starting in a shunt dc generator,  Figure 9-50
 show s the voltage buildup as though it occurred in discrete  steps, These steps are drawn in to make obvious the positive feedback between the  generator's internal voltage and its field current. In a real generator, the voltage  does not build up in discrete steps: Instead both E A and IF increase simultaneously  until steady-state conditions are reached,  What if a shunt generator is started and no voltage builds up? What could be  wron g? nlere are several possible causes for the voltage to
 fail to build up during  starting, Am ong them are  L There ma y be no residual magnetic flux in the generator to start the process  going, If the residual flux ~re. = 0, then E A = 0, and the voltage never builds  up, If this problem occurs, disconnect the field from the armature circuit and  connect it directly to an external dc source such as a battery, 1lle current flow  from this external dc source will leave a residual flux in the poles, which will  then allow normal starting, nlis proced
ure is known as "flashing the field,"  2. The direction of rotation of the generator m ay have been reversed, or the con­ nections of the field may have been reversed, In either case, the residual flux  produces an internal generated voltage EA, Th e voltage EA produces a field  current which produces a flux opposing the residual flux, instead of adding to  it. Und er these circum stances, the flux actually decreases below ~r •• and no  voltage can ever build up,  If this problem occurs, it can 
be fixed by reversing the direction of rota­ tion, by reversing the field connections, or by flashing the field with the op­ posite ma gnetic polarity,  v" v,  v,  R,  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 605  ~ '------------------------------ /F.A  FIGU R E 9-51  The elTect of shunt fietd resistance on no-load tenninal voltage in a dc generator. If Rr > Rl (the  critical resistance). then the generator's voltage will never build up.  3. The field resistance may be adjusted to a value greater than the criti
cal re­ sistance. To understand this problem, refer to Figure 9-51. Nonnally, the  shunt generator will build up to the point where the ma gnetization curve in­ tersects the field resistance line. If the field resistance has the value show n at  R l in the figure, its line is nearly parallel to the ma gnetization curve. At that  point, the voltage of the generator can fluctuate very widely with only tiny  changes in RF or lit. nlis value of the resistance is called the critical resis­ tance. If 
RF exceeds the critical resistance (as at R 3 in the figure), then the  steady-state operating voltage is essentially at the residual level, and it never  builds up. The solution to this problem is to reduce Rr.  Since the voltage of the ma gnetization curve varies as a function of shaft  speed, the critical resistance also varies with speed. In general, the lowe r the shaft  speed, the lower the critical resistance.  Th e Terminal C haracteristic of a  Shunt D C Ge nerator  T he terminal charac
teristic of a shunt dc generator differs from that of a separately  excited dc generator, because the amou nt of field current in the ma chine depends  on its terminal voltage. To understand the terminal characteristic of a shunt gen­ erator, start with the ma chine unloaded and add loads, observing what happens.  As the load on the generator is increased, II-increases and so lit = IF + IL i  also increases. An increase in lit increases the annature resistance voltage drop  IItR It, causing Vr =
 Elt - lit i RIt to decrease. T his is precisely the same behavior  observed in a separately excited generat.or. H owever, when Vr decreases, the field  current in the machine decreases with it. T his causes the flux in the ma chine to  606 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  ---=::---===--------------}-:~A  --- I-;i:Id weakening  effect  L-____________________________ ~  ""GURE 9-52  The terminal characteristic of a shunt dc generator.  decrease, decreasing EA- Decreasing EA causes a further d
ecrease in the terminal  voltage Vr = EAJ.. - lARA' TIle resulting terminal characteristic is show n in Figure  9-52. Notice that the voltage drop-off is steeper than just the lARA drop in a sepa­ rately excited generator. In other words, the voltage regulation of this generator is  worse than the voltage regulation of the same piece of equipment connected sep­ aratelyexcited.  Vo ltage Co ntrol for a Shunt D C Genera tor  As with the separately excited generator, there are two ways to control t
he voltage  of a shunt generator:  I. Change the shaft speed W m of the generator.  2. Change the field resistor of the generator, thus changing the field current.  Changing the field resistor is the principal m ethod used to control tenninal  voltage in real shunt generators. If the field resistor RF is decreased, then the field  current IF = VrIRFJ.. increases. Wh en IF increases, the ma chine's flux <P increases,  causing the internal generated voltage EA to increase. The increase in EA cause
s  the tenninal voltage of the generator to increase as well.  T he Analysis of Shunt D C Ge nerators  TIle analysis of a shunt dc generator is som ew hat m ore complicated than the  analysis of a separately excited generator, because the field current in the ma chine  depends directly on the ma chine's own output voltage. First the analysis of shunt  generators is studied for ma chines with no armature reaction, and afterward the  effects are annature reaction are included.  rx: MmDRS AND GENER
ATORS 607  v,  V,.  V,~  VT versus IF  EA reduction  --------------->6/-r~  ,  ,  EA versus IF  '-________________ -.L-________ ~  11'01  FIGURE 9-53  Graphical analysis of a shunt dc generator with contpensating windings.  Figure 9-53 show s a ma gnetization curve for a shunt dc generator drawn at  the actual operating speed of the ma chine. The field resistance RF> which is just  equal to VTIIF> is shown by a straight line laid over the ma gnetization curve. At no  load, VT = E A and the gener
ator operates at the voltage where the ma gnetization  curve intersects the field resistance line.  Th e key to understanding the graphical analysis of shunt generators is to re­ m emb er Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL ):  (9-45)  (9-46)  Th e difference between the internal generated voltage and the tenninal voltage is  just the lARA drop in the machine. Th e line of a 11 possible values of EA is the ma g­ netization curve, and the line of all possible tenninal voltages is the resistor line  (IF 
= VT IR F)· Therefore, to find the tenninal voltage for a given load, just deter­ mine the lARA drop and locate the place on the graph where that drop fits exactly  between the E A line and the V T line. Th ere are at m ost two places on the curve  where the lARA drop will fit exactly. If there are two possible positions, the one  nearer the no-load voltage will represent a normal operating point.  A detailed plot showing several di fferent points on a shunt generator's char­ acteristic is shown
 in Figure 9-54. N ote the dashed line in Figure 9-54b. lllis line  is the terminal characteristic when the load is being reduced. llle reason that it  does not coincide with the line of increasing load is the hysteresis in the stator  poles of the generator.  608 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  , L  V,  1.  lARA drop ---IV  VIT> -~  , :; , ,". ,  , , I ,  1".//  VV /  /,/ ///  ,  ,  ~ ,/  ,  ,  I,  ,,' ,b,  ""GURE 9-54  Graphical derivation of the terminal characteristic of a shunt dc generato
r.  If annature reaction is present in a shunt generator, this process becomes a  little m ore complicated. The armature reaction produces a demagnetizing ma gne­ tom otive force in the generator at the same time that the lARA drop occurs in the  ma chine.  To analyze a generator with annature reaction present, assume that its ar­ mature current is known . Then the resistive voltage drop lAR A is known, and the  demagnetizing ma gnetomotive force of the annature current is know n.1lle tenni­ nal
 voltage of this generator mu st be large enough to supply the generator's nux  after the demagnetizing effects of armature reaction have been subtracted. To  meet this requirement both the annature reaction ma gnetom otive force and the  lARA drop mu st fit between the E ll. line and the VT line. To detennine the output  voltage for a given ma gnetomotive force, simply locate the place under the ma g­ netization curve where the triangle formed by the armature reaction and lAR A ef­ fects exactl
y fits between the line of possible VT values and the line of possible E ll.  values (see Figure 9-55).  9.14 T H E SE RIES DC GENE R ATO R  A series dc generator is a generator whose field is connected in series with its ar­ mature. Since the annature has a much higher current than a shunt field, the series  field in a generator of this sort will have only a very few turns of wire, and the  wire used will be mu ch thicker than the wire in a shunt field. Because ma gneto­ m otive force is given 
by the equation'?} = NI, exactly the same ma gnetomotive  force can be produced from a few turns with high current as can be produced from  many turns with low current. Since the full-load current flows through it, a series  field is designed to have the lowest possible resistance. 1lle equivalent circuit of  a series dc generator is show n in Figure 9-56. H ere, the annature current, field  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATORS 609  Ell. '" Vr at no load r ---------:;::'J ......... C  lARA drop  Ell. with 
load r---"-''----'-''<;::/lr(  Ell. versus IF  Vr with load f------y"-"'k;Y  Dem agnetizing mmf  (converted to an equivalent field current)  '-------------------------- ~  FIGURE 9-55  Graphical analysis of a shunt dc generator with annature reaction.  (NSF. turns)  + v,  HGURE 9-S6  111. "'ls"'IL  Vr",EA -IA(RA+R s)  The equivalent circuit of a series dc  generator.  currenl, and line currenl all have the same value. Th e Kirchhoff's voltage law  equation for this ma chine is  (9-47)  The Termi
nal Characteristic of a Series Generator  The m agnetization curve of a series dc generator looks very mu ch like the m agne­ tization curve of any other generator. At no load, howev er, there is no field current,  so Vr is reduced to a sm all level given by the residual nux in the ma chine. As the  load increases, the field current rises, so E ll. rises rapidly. Th e iA(R A + R s) drop goes  up too, but at first the increase in E ll. goes up more rapidly than the iA(R A + R s) drop  rises, so V
r increases. After a while, the ma chine approaches saturation, and Ell.  610 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  /  /  b  /  /  /  ~~---T)- /","'" I 111. (RA + Rs ) drop  /  / V,  '---------------h (= Is= 111.)  ""GU R E 9-57  Derivation of the terminal characteristic for a series dc generator.  V,  Armature  reaction  '--____________ -'L-~  ""GU R E 9-58  A series generator tenninal characteristic with large armature reaction effects. suitable for electric  welders.  becomes almost constant. At
 that point, the resistive drop is the predominant effect,  and V T starts to fall.  lllis type of characteristic is show n in Figure 9-57. It is obvious that this  ma chine would mak e a bad constant-voltage source. In fact, its voltage regulation  is a large negative number.  Series generators are used only in a few specialized applications, where the  steep voltage characteristic of the device can be exploited. On e such application  is arc welding. Series generators used in arc welding are d
eliberately designed to  have a large annature reaction, which gives them a terminal characteristic like the  one show n in Figure 9-58. N otice that when the welding electrodes make contact  with each other before welding commen ces, a very large current flows. A s the op­ erator separates the welding electrodes, there is a very steep rise in the generator's  voltage, while the current remains high. T his voltage ensures that a welding arc is  maintained through the air between the electrodes. 
 OCMmDRSANDGENERATORS 611  +  FIGURE 9-59  IIt"'h+IF  vT '" Elt -11t(RIt + Rsl  v,  IF"'1fF  :¥ .... '" NF IF + NSFJIt - ::fAR  • v,  The equivalent cirwit of a cumulatively compounded dc generator with a long-shunt connection.  9.15 THE CUMULATIVELY COMPOUNDED  DC GENERATOR  A cumulatively comp ounded dc generator is a dc generator with both series and  shunt fields, connected so that the ma gnetomoti ve forces from the two fields are  additive. Figure 9-59 shows the equivalent circuit ofa cumu
latively compound ed  dc generator in the "long-shunt" connection. TIle dots that appear on the two field  coils have the same meaning as the dots on a transfonner: Current flowing into a  dot produces a positive magnetomotive force. N otice that the annature current  flows into the dotted end of the series field coil and that the shunt current IF flows  into the dotted end of the shunt field coil. Th erefore, the total ma gnetom otive  force on this ma chine is given by  (9-48)  where 'ifF is t
he shunt field ma gnetomotive force, 'ifSE is the series field ma gneto­ motive force, and 2FAR is the armature reaction ma gnetomotive force. Th e equiva­ lent effective shunt field current for this ma chine is given by  NFl; = NFIF + NsEJA - 2FAR  Th e other voltage and current relationships for this generator are  IIA -iF + I, I  (9-49)  (9-50)  (9-51)  612 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  •  v,  ""GURE 9-60  The equivalent cin;uit of a cumulatively compounded dc generator with a short-shunt 
connection.  (9-52)  TIlere is another way to hook up a cumulatively compound ed generator. It  is the "short-shunt" connection, where the series field is outside the shunt field  circuit and has current IL flowing through it instead of I .... A short-shunt cumula­ tively compounded dc generator is show n in Figure 9-60.  The Terminal Characteristic of a Cumulatively  Compounded DC Generator  To understand the terminal characteristic of a cumulatively compounded dc gen­ erator, it is necessary t
o understand the competing effects that occur within the  ma chine.  Suppose that the load on the generator is increased. Then as the load in­ creases, the load current IL increases. Since IA = IF + IL i, the annature current IA  increases too. At this point two effects occur in the generator:  I. As IA increases, the IA(RA + Rs) voltage drop increases as well.1l1is tends to  cause a decrease in the terminal voltage V T = EA - IA i (RA + Rs).  2. As IA increases, the series field ma gnetom otive
 force 91'SE = NSEIA increases  too. This increases the total ma gnetomotive force 91"0' = NFIF + NSEIA i  which increases the flux in the generator.1l1e increased flux in the generator  increases EA, which in turn tends to mak e VT = EA i - IA(RA + Rs) rise.  TIlese two effects oppose each other, with one tending to increase VT and  the other tending to decrease VT . Whi ch effect predominates in a given ma chine?  It all depends on just how many series turns were placed on the poles of the ma­
 chine. The question can be answered by taking several individual cases:  I. Few series turns (NSE smnll). If there are only a few series turns, the resistive  voltage drop effect wins hands down. Th e voltage falls off just as in a shunt  OCMmDRSANDGENERATORS 613  v,  Und ercompounded  Shum  L-___________________ /~-------~  "  FIGURE 9-61  Terminal characteristics of cumulatively compounded dc generators.  generator, but not quite as steeply (Figure 9--61). This type of construction,  where th
e full-load tenninal voltage is less than the no-load tenninal voltage,  is called undercompounded.  2. More series turns (NSE larger). If there are a few m ore series turns of wire on  the poles, then at first the flux-strengthening effect wins, and the terminal  voltage rises with the load. H owever, as the load continues to increase, ma g­ netic saturation sets in, and the resistive drop becomes stronger than the flux  increase effect. In such a ma chine, the terminal voltage first rises and 
then  falls as the load increases. If VT at no load is equal to VTat full load, the gen­ erator is called flat-compounded.  3. Even more series turns are added (NSE large). If even m ore series turns are  added to the generator, the flux-strengthening effect predominates for a  longer time before the resistive drop takes over. Th e result is a characteristic  with the full-load tenninal voltage actually higher than the no-load tenninal  voltage. If VTat a full load exceeds VTat no load, the gene
rator is called over­ compounded.  A ll these possibilities are illustrated in Figure 9--61.  lt is also possible to realize all these voltage characteristics in a single gen­ erator if a diverter resistor is used. Figure 9--62 shows a cumulatively com­ pounded dc generator with a relatively large number of series turns N SE . A diverter  resistor is connected around the series field. If the resistor Rdh is adjusted to a  large value, m ost of the annature current flows through the series field 
coil, and  the generator is overcompounded. On the other hand, if the resistor R cJjy is adjusted  to a small value, m ost of the current flow s around the series field through R cJjy, and  the generator is undercompound ed. lt can be sm oothly adjusted with the resistor  to have any desired amount of comp ounding.  614 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  "/.  Y  I, R, R, L, I,  - • -• •  I, I y.:  (+)£,  /- R,  •  L,  ""GU R E 9-62  A cumulatively compounded dc generator with a series diverter r
esistor.  Vo ltage Control of C umulatively Co mp ound ed  D C Ge nerators  +  v,  - TIle techniques available for controlling the tenninal voltage of a cumul atively  com pounded dc generator are exactly the same as the techniques for controlling  the voltage of a shunt dc generator:  I. Chan ge the speed of rotation. An increase in w causes Ell = KtPwi to in­ crease, increasing the terminal voltage VT = Ell i - IIl(RIl + Rs).  2. Chan ge the field current. A decrease in RF causes IF = VT IRFJ.
. to increase,  which increases the total m agnetomotive force in the generator. A s ?ft",  increases, the nu x <p in the m achine increases, and Ell = KtPiw increases.  Finally, an increase in Ell raises VT.  A nalysis of C umul atively Co mp ound ed  D C Ge nerators  Equations (9-53) and (9-54) are the key to describing the tenninal characteristics  of a cumulatively com pounded dc generator. T he equivalent shunt field current leq  due to the effects of the series field and arm ature reaction
 is given by  I  NSE ?fAR  leq = NF IA - NF  Th erefore, the total effective shunt field current in the ma chine is  1;= IF + leq  (9-53)  (9-54)  TIlis equivalent current leq represents a horizontal distance to the left or the  right of the field resistance line (RF = VT IRF) along the axes of the m agnetization  curve.  OCMmDR S ANDGENERATORS 6 15  E" and Vr M agnetization curve (E" versus IF)  ~ __ ~E~,".~IO~"~~d~ __ ~~", __ -----­ E" and V r. no load 1-::=====7::fi~.=~} IR drop  V r· loaded 
I  '-------------------------- ~  FIGU R E 9-63  Graphical analysis of a cum ulatively com pou nded dc generator.  T he resistive drop in the generator is given by I"(R,, + Rs), which is a length  along the vertical axis on the m agnetization curve. Both the equivalent current le<j  and the resistive voltage drop I"(R,, + R s) depend on the strength of the arm ature  current I". 1llerefore, they form the two sides of a triangle wh ose magnitude is a  function of I", To find the output voltage fo
r a given load, detennine the size of the  triangle and fmd the one point wh ere it exactly fits between the field current line  and the m agnetization curve.  T his idea is illustrated in Figure 9--63. 1lle tenninal voltage at no-load con­ ditions will be the point at which the resistor line and the ma gnetization curve in­ tersect, as before. As load is added to the generator, the series field ma gnetom otive  force increases, increasing the equivalent shunt field current leq and the resistive
  voltage drop I"(R,, + R s) in the m achine. To find the new output voltage in this  generator, slide the leftmost edge of the resulting triangle along the shunt field cur­ rent line until the upper tip of the triangle touches the ma gnetization curve. The up­ per tip of the triangle then represents the internal generated voltage in the m achine,  while the low er line represents the tenninal voltage of the m achine.  Figure 9--64 show s this process repeated several times to construct a com ­ 
plete terminal characteristic for the generator.  9.16 TH E DIFFERENTIALLY C OMPO U NDED  D C GENERATOR  A differentially com pounded dc generator is a generator with both shunt and se­ ries fields, but this time their ma gnetomotiveforces subtract from each other. T he  616 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  L-_________ ~  '------------1,  ""GU R E 9-64  Graphical derivation of the terminal characteristic of a cumulatively compounded dc generator.  I, I,  " - • +  R, R, L, I, I v.,  /- I"= 
IL+I,,  + V,  E, • V, 1,,=][; ,  L,  V r= E" - I" (R" + Rsl  ""GU R E 9-65  The equivalent cin:uit of a differentially compounded dc generator with a long-shunt connection.  equivalenl circuit of a differentially compound ed dc generator is show n in Figure  9--65. Notice that the armature current is now flow ing out of a dotted coil end,  while the shunt field current is flow ing into a dotted coil end. In this ma chine, the  net ma gnetornotive force is  (9-55)  ~AR I (9-56)  OCMmDRSANDGENERAT
ORS 617  and the equivalent shunt field current due to the series field and annature reaction  is given by  NSE :fAR  leq = - NF IA - -N-F- (9-57)  T he total effective shunt field current in this ma chine is  (9-58a)  (9-58b)  L ike the cumulatively comp ounded generator, the differentially com­ pounded generator can be connected in either long-shunt or short-shunt fashion.  Th e Terminal C haracteristic of a Differentially  Co mp ound ed DC Ge nerator  In the differentially comp ounded dc gene
rator, the same two effects occur that  were present in the cumulatively compounded dc generator.lltis time, though, the  effects both act in the same direction. Th ey are  I. As Iii increases, the lli(RIi + Rs) voltage drop increases as well. T his increase  tends to cause the terminal voltage to decrease VT = Eli -Iii i (Rli + Rs).  2. As Iii increases, the series field magn etom otive force '3'SE = N SE IIi increases  too. lltis increase in series field ma gnetom otive force reduces the net m
a g­ netom otive force on the generator (2F,OI = NFIF - N SE IIi i), which in turn re­ duces the net flux in the generator. A decrease in flux decreases Eli, which in  turn decreases VT .  Since both these effects tend to decrease Vn the voltage drops drastically as  the load is increased on the generator. A typical tenninal characteristic for a dif­ ferentially comp ounded dc generator is shown in Figure 9-66.  Vo ltage Co ntrol of Differentially Co mpound ed  D C G enerators  Even though the v
oltage drop characteristics of a differentially comp ounded dc  generator are quite bad, it is still possible to adjust the terminal voltage at any  given load setting. T he techniques available for adjusting tenninal voltage are ex­ actly the same as those for shunt and cumulatively compound ed dc generators:  I. Change the speed of rotation W m .  2. Change the field current IF.  618 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  Differentially  contpounded  Shunt  L--------------_I,  ""GU R E 9-66  T
he terminal characteristic of a differentially contpounded dc generator.  EAnJ and Vrnl f------CCCO---7r'  IRdrop  EA' loaded f::====::;;2ti¥ V r. loaded r- I.,  '--------------1,  ""GU R E 9-67  Graphical analysis of a differentially contpounded dc generator.  Craphical Analysis of a Differentially  Compounded DC Generator  TIle voltage characteristic of a differentially compound ed dc generator is graphi­ cally detennined in precisely the same mann er as that used for the cumulatively  comp ou
nded dc generator. To find the terminal characteristic of the ma chine, re­ fer to Figure 9--67.  OCMmDRSANDGENERATORS 6 19  v,  1 ~7"1'----------t----4;- DifferentiallY  leq compo unded  '----------l, '------------l,  FIGURE 9-68  Graphical derivation of the terminal characteristic of a differentially contpounded dc generator.  Th e portion of the effective shunt field current due to the actual shunt field  is al wa ys equal to VT IR F , since that mu ch current is present in the shunt field. T
h e  remainder of the effective field current is given by Ieq and is the sum of the series  field and annature reaction effects. This equivalent current 1O<j represents a nega­ tive horizontal distance along the axes of the ma gnetization curve, since both the  series field and the armature reaction are subtractive.  The resistive drop in the generator is given by IA(RA + Rs), which is a length  along the vertical axis on the ma gnetization curve. To fmd the output voltage for  a given load, det
ennine the size of the triangle formed by the resistive voltage  drop and 1O<j' and find the one point wh ere it exactly fits between the field current  line and the ma gnetization curve.  Figure 9--68 show s this process repeated several times to construct a com­ plete terminal characteristic for the generator.  9.17 SUMMA RY  Th ere are several types of dc mot ors, differing in the manner in which their  field fluxes are derived. The se types of m otors are separately excited, shunt,  permanen
t-magnet, series, and compounded. TIle mann er in which the flux is de­ rived affects the way it varies with the load, which in turn affects the m otor's  overall torque-speed characteristic.  A shunt or separately excited dc m otor has a torque-speed characteristic  whose speed drops linearly with increasing torque. Its speed can be controlled by  changing its field current, its annature voltage, or its annature resistance.  A pennanent-magnet dc motor is the same basic ma chine except that its
 flux  is derived from pennanent ma gnets. Its speed can be controlled by any of the  above m ethods except varying the field current.  620 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  A series motor has the highest starting torque of any dc mot or but tends to  overspeed at no load. It is used for very high-torque applications where speed reg­ ulation is not important, such as a car starter.  A cumulatively comp ounded dc m otor is a compromi se between the series  and the shunt m otor, having som e of the
 best characteristics of each. On the other  hand, a differentially compounded dc m otor is a complete disaster. It is unstable  and tends to overspeed as load is added to it.  DC generators are dc ma chines used as generators. TIlere are several differ­ ent types of dc generators, differing in the manner in which their field fluxes are  derived. Th ese method s affect the output characteristics of the different types of  generators. Th e comm on dc generator types are separately excited, shunt,
 series,  cumulatively comp ounded, and differentially compound ed.  TIle shunt and comp ounded dc generators depend on the nonlinearity of  their ma gnetization curves for stable output voltages. If the ma gnetization curve  of a dc ma chine w ere a straight line, then the ma gnetization curve and the tenni­ nal voltage line of the generator would never intersect. TIlere would thus be no  stable no-load voltage for the generator. Since nonlinear effects are at the heart of  the generator's oper
ation, the output voltages of dc generators can onl y be deter­ mined graphically or num erically by using a comput er.  Today, dc generators have been replaced in many applications by ac power  sources and solid-state electronic compon e nts. TIlis is true even in the automobile,  which is one of the m ost comm on users of dc power.  QUESTIONS  9-1. What is the speed regulation of a dc motor?  9-2. H ow can the speed of a shunt dc motor be controlled? Explain in detail.  9-3. What is the practi
cal difference between a separately excited and a shunt dc motor?  9-4. What effect does annature reaction have on the torque-speed characteristic of a  shunt dc motor? Can the effects of annature reaction be serious? What can be done  to remedy this problem?  9-5. What are the desirable characteristics of the permanent magnets in PMD C  machines?  9-6. What are the principal characteristics of a series dc motor? What are its uses?  9-7. What are the characteristics of a cumulatively compOlmded 
dc motor?  9-8. What are the problems associated with a differentially compounded dc motor?  9-9. What happens in a shlUlt dc motor if its field circuit opens while it is flmning?  9-10. Why is a starting resistor used in dc motor circuits?  9-11. H ow can a dc starting resistor be cut out of a motor's armature circuit at just the  right time during starting?  9-12. What is the Ward-Leonard motor control system? What are its advantages and  disadvantages?  9-13. What is regeneration?  9-14. What
 are the advantages and disadvantages of solid-state motor drives compared to  the Ward-Leonard system?  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATOR S 621  9-15. What is the pwpo se of a field loss relay?  9-16. Wh at types of protective features are included in typical solid-state dc m otor drives?  H ow do they w ork?  9-17. H ow can the direction of rotation of a separately excited dc m otor be reversed?  9-18. H ow can the direction of rotation of a shunt dc m otor be reversed?  9-19. H ow can the direction of
 rotation of a series dc m otor be reversed?  9-20. Nam e and describe the features of the five types of generators covered in this  chapter.  9-21. H ow does the voltage buildup occur in a shunt dc generator during starting?  9-22. Wh at could cause voltage buildup on starting to fail to occur? H ow can this problem  be rem edied?  9-23. H ow does arm ature reaction affect the output voltage in a separately excited dc  generator?  9-24. Wh at causes the extraordinarily fast voltage drop w ith i
ncreasing load in a differen­ tially com pounded dc generator?  PROBLEMS  Problem s 9-1 to 9-12 refer to the follow ing dc m otor:  Prned = 15 hp  Vr=240 V  nrned = 1200 r/min  RA = 0.40 n  Rs = 0.04 n  h..,,'od = 55 A  NF = 2700 turns per pole  NS E = 27 turns per pole  RF = 100 0  R odj = 100 to 400 0  R otational losses are 1800 W at full load. M agnetization curve is as shown in Figure P9--I.  In Problem s 9-1 through 9-7. assrune that the m otor described above can be con­ nected in shlUlt.
 The equivalent circuit of the shunt m otor is shown in Figure P9-2.  9-1. If the resistor R odj is adjusted to 175 n w hat is the rotational speed of the m otor at  no-load conditions?  9-2. A ssuming no annature reaction. what is the speed of the m otor at full load? Wh at is  the speed regulation of the m otor?  9-3. If the m otor is operating at full load and if its variable resistance R odj is increased to  250 n. wh at is the new speed of the m otor? Co mpare the full-load speed of the m o
­ tor w ith R odj = 175 n to the full-load speed w ith Rodj = 250 O. (A ssum e no ann a­ ture reaction. as in the previous problem.)  9-4. A ssum e that the m otor is operating at full load and that the variable resistor R odj is  again 175 n. If the annature reaction is 1200 A· turns at full load. what is the speed  of the m otor? H ow does it compare to the result for Problem 9--2?  9-5. If R odj can be adjusted from 100 to 400 n. w hat are the m aximum and minimrun no­ load speeds possible wi
th this m otor?  9-6. Wh at is the starting ClUTent of this m achine if it is started by connecting it directly  to the pow er supply Vr? H ow does this starting current comp are to the full-load cur­ rent of the m otor?  622 ELECTR IC M AC HINE R Y RJNDA M ENTALS  >  -' f  ~  ~  !,  " E  • •  320  300 Speed 1200r/min  280  260  V  /'  240  220  V 200  180 /  160  140 /  120  100 /  80  60 /  40  20 /  ,II  o 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 l.l 1.2 1.3 1.4  Shum field currem. A  ""GU R E
 1'9-1  The masnetization curve for the dc motor in Problems 9--1 to 9-12. This curve was made at a  constam speed of 1200 r/min.  9-7. Plot the torque-speed characteristic of this motor assuming no armature reaction.  and again assuming a full-load armature reaction of 1200 A ollU1lS.  For Problems 9--8 and 9-9. the shunt dc motor is reconnected separately excited. as shown  in Figure P9-3. It has a fixed field voltage V I' of 240 V and an annature voltage VA that can  be varied from 120 to 240
 V.  9-8. What is the no-load speed of this separately excited motor when R>dj = 175 nand  (a) VA = 120 V. (b) VA = 180 V. (c) VA = 240 V ?  9-9. For the separately excited motor of Problem 9--8:  (a) What is the maximwn no-load speed attainable by varying both VA and R>dj?  (b) What is the minimwn no-load speed attainable by varying both VA and R>dj?  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 623  - - 0.4On ~  IF I ~ Rodj  + lOon V r= 240 V  FIGU R E P9-2  The equiva.lent circuit of the shunt ntotor in Problems
 9-1 to 9-7.  I, I, R, I,  - - " -+ +  0.40 n  R.,  + VF = 240 V RF = 100 n E, VA =120to240V  FIGU R E P9-J  The equiva.lent circuit of the separately excited motor in Problems 9--8 and 9--9.  9-10. If the motor is connected cumulatively compOlUlded as shown in Figure P9-4 and if  R adj = 175 O. what is its no-load speed? What is its full-load speed? What is its  speed regulation? Calculate and plot the torque-speed characteristic for this motor.  (Neglect annature effects in this problem.)  9-1
1. The motor is connected cumulatively compounded and is operating at full load.  What will the new speed of the motor be if Radj is increased to 250 O ? H ow does the  new speed compare to the full-load speed calculated in Problem 9--1O?  9-12. The motor is now connected differentially compo unded.  (a) If Radj = 175 O. what is the no-load speed of the motor?  (b) What is the motor's speed when the annature current reaches 20A? 40 A? 60A?  (c) Calculate and plot the torque-speed characteristic 
curve of this motor.  9-13. A 7.5-hp. l20-V series dc motor has an armature resistance of 0.2 0 and a series field  resistance of 0.16 O. At full load. the current input is 58 A. and the rated speed is  624 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  O.4411",RA +R S  .'" Cumulatively compounded  • '" Differentially compounded  + 100 n VT ", 240 V  ••  ""GURE 1'9-4  The equivalent cin:uit of the compounded motor in Problems 9-10 to 9--12.  1050 r/min. Its magnetization curve is shown in Figure P9-5. The cor
e losses are 200  W, and the mechanical losses are 240 W al full load. A ssume that the mechanical  losses vary as the cube of the speed of the motor and that the core losses are constant.  (a) What is the efficiency of the motor at fullload1  (b) What are the speed and efficiency of the motor ifit is operating at an annature  current of 35 A 1  (c) Plot the torque-speed characteristic for this motor.  9-14. A 20-hp, 240-V, 76-A, 900 r/min series motor has a field winding of 33 turns per  pole. 
Its annature resistance is 0.09 n, and its field resistance is 0.06 n. The mag­ netization curve expressed in terms of magnetomotive force versus EA at 900 r/min  is given by the following table:  95 188 212 229 243  :Ji. A • turns '00 1500 2000 2500 3000  Annature reaction is negligible in this machine.  (a) CompUle the motor's torque, speed, and output power a133, 67,100, and 133  percent of full-load armalure ClUTent. (Neglect rotational losses.)  (b) Plot the torque-speed characteristic of t
his machine.  9-15. A300-hp, 44O-V, 560-A, 863 r/min shunt dc motor has been tested, and the follow­ ing data were taken:  Blocked-rotor test:  VA = 16.3 V exclusive of brushes  110. = 500 A  N o-load operation:  VA = 16.3 V including brushes  110. = 23.1 A  VF = 440 V  IF= 8.86A  IF= 8.76A  n = 863 r/min  >  J • ~  • " ~  • • , ,  a  1!  ~  160  150  140  130  120  110  100  90  80  70  60  50  /  40  30  20  /  /  / 10  / o o 10  /  /  rx: MmDR S AND GENERATOR S 625  5,.., 1200r~  /"  /  /  / 
 /  /  20 30 40 60 70  Series field current. A  FIGU R E 1'9-5  Th e magnetization curve for the series moior in P roblem 9--13. Th is curve was taken al a constant  speed of 1200 r/min.  Wh at is this m otor's efficiency at the rated conditions? [Note: A ssrune that (1) the  brush voltage drop is 2 V, (2) the core loss is to be determin ed at an arm ature volt­ age equal to the armature voltage lUlder full load, and (3) stray load losses are 1 per­ cent of full load.]  Problem s 9- 16 to 9--19 
refer to a 240-V , IOO- A de m otor w hich has both shunt and series  w indings. Its characteristics are  RA =O .14f.!  Rs = 0.04 n  R" = 200 n  R adj = 0 to 300 n, currently set to 120 n  N " = 1500 turns  N sf', = 12 turns  nO. = 1200 r/min  626 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  300  250  > 200  j  "' ~  /  ~ 150  ,  ~  • E  • • 100  /  / o  0.0  ""GU R E 1'9-6  0.25  S"",d 1200 r/min  /  /  /  0.50 0.75  Field current. A  1.00  The masnetization curve for the dc motor in Problems 9--16 to 9
--19.  1.25 1.50  This m otor has compe nsating windings and interpoles. Th e ma gnetization curve for this  m otor at 1200 rfmin is shown in Figure P9--6.  9-16. Th e m otor described above is connected in shunt.  (a) Wh at is the no-load speed of this m otor when R odj = 120 0 ?  (b) Wh at is its full-load speed?  (c) Und er no-load conditions. w hat range of possible speeds can be achieved by  adjusting Rodj?  9-17. This ma chine is now connected as a cumulatively compound ed dc m otor with  
Rod j = 120 n.  (a) What is the full-load speed of this m otor?  (b) Plot the torque-speed characteristic for this m otor.  (c) What is its speed regulation?  9-18. Th e m otor is recotulected differentially compolUlded w ith R adj = 120 O. Derive the  shape of its torque-speed characteristic.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 627  9-19. A series motor is now constructed from this machine by leaving the shlUlt field out  entirely. Derive the torque-speed characteristic of the resulting motor.  9-20. An 
automatic starter circuit is to be designed for a shlUlt motor rated at 15 hp. 240  V. and 60 A. The annature resistance of the motor is 0.15 n. and the shunt field re­ sistance is 40 n. The motor is to start with no more than 250 percent of its rated ar­ mature current. and as soon as the current falls to rated value. a starting resistor  stage is to be cut out. H ow many stages of starting resistance are needed. and how  big should each one be?  9-21. A 15-hp. 230-V. 1800 rlmin shunt dc motor 
has a full-load armature current of 60 A  when operating at rated conditions. The annature resistance of the motor is RA =  0.15 n. and the field resistance R" is 80 n.The adjustable resistance in the field cir­ cuit R>dj may be varied over the range from 0 to 200 n and is currently set to 90 n.  Annature reaction may be ignored in this machine. The magnetization curve for this  motor. taken at a speed of 1800 r/min. is given in tabular fonn below:  0.80 1.00 1.28  242 8.' I 150 I  180  0.00 2.8
8  (a) What is the speed of this motor when it is ruIllling at the rated conditions spec­ ified above?  (b) The output power from the motor is 7.5 hp at rated conditions. What is the out­ put torque of the motor?  (c) What are the copper losses and rotational losses in the motor at full load (ignore  stray losses)?  (d) What is the efficiency of the motor at full load?  (e) If the motor is now unloaded with no changes in tenninal voltage or R>dj' what  is the no-load speed of the motor?  (f) Sup
pose that the motor is running at the no-load conditions described in part e.  What would happen to the motor if its field circuit were to open? Ignoring ar­ mature reaction. what would the final steady-state speed of the motor be under  those conditions?  (g) What range of no-load speeds is possible in this motor. given the range offield  resistance adjustments available with Radj?  9-22. The magnetization curve for a separately excited dc generator is shown in Figure  P9-7. The generator is ra
ted at 6 kW , 120 V. 50 A. and ISOO rlmin and is shown in  Figure P9-8. Its field circuit is rated at SA. The following data are known about the  machine:  RA = O.ISO  ~j = Ot030n  N" = 1000 turns per pole  V,,= 120V  R,,=2 4n  Answer the following questions about this generator. assruning no armature reaction.  (a) If this generator is operating at no load. what is the range of voltage adjustments  that can be achieved by changing Radj?  (b) If the field rheostat is allowed to vary from 0 to 30
 n and the generator's speed  is allowed to vary from 1500 to 2()(x) r/min. what are the maximwn and mini­ mum no-load voltages in the generator?  628 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  160  150  140  a ---V-a  a /"  13  12  II  /  /  II a  a  I  /  /  II  40  /  a /  a /  ,II  30  2  a 2 3 4 , 6 7  Shunt field current. A  a 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000  Field mmf. A· turns  ""GURE 1'9-7  The magnetization curve for Problems 9--22 to 9--28. This curve was taken at a speed of 1800 r/min.  9
-23. If the armature current of the generator in Problem 9--22 is 50 A. the speed of the  generator is 1700 r/min. and the tenninal voltage is 106 V, how much field current  mu st be flowing in the generator?  9-24. Assuming that the generator in Problem 9-22 has an annature reaction at full load  equivalent to 400 A • turns of magnetomotive force. what will the terminal voltage  of the generator be when I" = 5 A. n .. = 1700 r/min. and IA = 50 A ?  9-25. The machine in Problem 9--22 is reconnec
ted as a shunt generator and is shown in  Figure P9-9. The shunt field resistor R>d j is adjusted to 10 n. and the generator's  speed is 1800 r/min.  rx: M mD R S A ND G ENE RA TOR S 629  I, R, I, I,  - - -+  O.~ 8n  +  :/ R~  120 V V, RF=24f1 ~  c,JE'  V,  L,  FIG U R E 1'9-8  Th e separately excited de generator in Problems 9--22 to 9--24.  R,  ,-~-----"V'VV'--------~e--C----~+  0.18 n i'" J IF  R-».  + 24 n ~ RF V,  FIGU R E 1'9-9  Th e shunt de generator in Problems 9-25 and 9--26.  (a) Wh a
t is the no-load lennina! voltage of the generator?  (b) Assruning no arm ature reaction, what is the terminal voltage of the generator  w ith an armature current of 20 A ? 40 A ?  (c) Assruning an ann ature reaction equal to 300 A • turns at [unload, w hat is the  lennina! voltage of the generator w ith an arm ature current of 20 A ? 40 A ?  (d) Calculate and plot the terminal characteristics of this generator w ith and with­ out arm ature reaction.  9-26. If the m achine in Problem 9--25 is ru
nning at 1800 r/min w ith a field resistance R odj  = 10 n and an annature current of 25 A , what w ill the resulting terminal voltage  be? If the field resistor decreases to 5 n w hile the armature current rem ains 25 A ,  w hat w ill the new terminal voltage be? (A ssrune no arm ature reaction.)  9-27. A 120-V, 50-A cumul atively com po unded dc generator h as the follow ing  characteristics:  RA + Rs = 0.2 1 n  RF = 20 n  R >dj = 0 to 30 n, set to 10 n  N F = J()(X) turns  NSE = 20 turns  n .
. = 1800 r/min  630 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  0.21 n  + 200 v,  •  L" N,,= 1000  turns  ""G UR E 1'9-10  The compounded dc generator in Problems 9--27 and 9-28.  Th e m achine has the m agnetization curve show n in Figure P9-7. Its equivalent cir­ cuit is show n in Figure P9--1O. A nswer the follow ing questions about this m achine,  assumin g no ann ature reaction.  (a) If the generator is operating at no load, w hat is its terminal voltage?  (b) If the generator has an arm ature c
urrent of 20 A, w hat is its tenninal voltage?  (c) If the generator has an arm ature current of 40 A , w hat is its tenninal voltage?  (d) Calculate and plot the tenninal characteristic of this m achine.  9-28. If the m achine described in Problem 9-27 is reconnected as a differentially com ­ pounded dc generator, what w ill its teoninal characteristic look like? D erive it in the  same fashion as in Problem 9-27.  9-29. A c umul atively com pounded dc generator is operating properly as a flat­
 com pounded dc generator. Th e m achine is then shut dow n, and its shunt field con­ nections are reversed.  (a) If this generator is turned in the sam e direction as before, w ill an output voltage  be built up at its tenninals? Wh y or w hy not?  (b) Will the voltage build up for rotation in the opposite direction? Wh y or w hy  not?  (c) For the direction of rotation in w hich a voltage builds up, will the generator be  cumul atively or differentially comp olUlded?  9-30. A three-phase synch
ronous m achine is m echanically connected to a shlUlt dc m a­ chine, fonning a m otor-generator set, as show n in Figure P9--ll. Th e dc m achine is  connected to a dc powe r system supplying a constant 240 V, and the ac m achine is  connected to a 480-V, 60-H z infinite bus.  Th e dc mac hine has four poles and is rated at 50 kW and 240 V. It has a per-unit  ann ature resistance of 0.04. Th e ac m achine has four poles and is V-connected. It is  rated at 50 kVA , 480 V, and 0.8 PF, and its sat
urated synchronous reactance is 2.0 n  per phase.  All losses except the dc m achine's ann ature resistance m ay be neglected in this  problem. A ssum e that the m agnetization curves of both m achines are linear.  (a) Initially, the ac m achine is supplying 50 kVA at 0.8 PF lagging to the ac powe r  system.  rx: MmDRS AND GENERATORS 63 1  MGset  rx: machine AC machine  1'1 R,  6 R,  ~ AC power  , V, E, system  , (infinite bus)  & L,  ~  R, L,  + V,  FIGU R E 1'9-11  Th e motor-generator set in 
Problem 9-30.  I. H ow much power is being supplied to the dc motor from the dc power  system?  2. H ow large is the internal generated voltage EA of the dc machine?  3. H ow large is the internal generated voltage EA of the ac machine?  (b) The field current in the ac machine is now increased by 5 percent. What effect  does this change have on the real power supplied by the motor-generator set?  On the reactive power supplied by the motor-generator set? Calculate the real  and reactive power su
pplied or consumed by the ac machine under these condi­ tions. Sketch the ac machine's phasor diagram before and after the change in  field current.  (c) Starting from the conditions in part b. the field current in the dc machine is now  decreased by I percent. What effect does this change have on the real power  supplied by the motor-generator set? On the reactive power supplied by the  motor-generator set? Calculate the real and reactive power supplied or con­ swned by the ac machine lUlder th
ese conditions. Sketch the ac machine's pha­ sor diagram before and after the change in the dc machine's field current.  (d) From the above results. answer the following questions:  I. H ow can the real power flow through an ac-dc motor-generator set be  controlled?  2. H ow can the reactive power supplied or consumed by the ac machine be  controlled without affecting the real power flow?  REFER ENC ES  1. Chaston. A. N. Electric Machinery. R eston. Va.: R eston Publications. 1986.  2. Fitzgeral
d. A. E.. and C. Kingsley. Jr. Electric Machinery. New YorK: McGraw- H ill. 1952.  3. Fitzgerald. A. E.. C. Kingsley. Jr .• and S. D. Umans. Electric Machinery. 5th ed. N ew York:  McGraw- H ill. 1990.  4. H eck. C. Magnetic Materials and Their AppliCllTions. London: Butterwonh & Co .. 1974.  632 E L ECTR IC M AC HIN E R Y RJ N DA MENT ALS  5. IEE E Standard 113-1985. Guide on Test Procedures for DC Machines. P iscataway. N .J.: IEE E.  1985. (N ote that this standard has been officially withdra
wn but is still available.)  6. K loeftler. S. M .• R . M . K en;hner. and J. L. B renneman. Direct Current Machinery. Rev. ed.  N ew York: M acmillan. 1948.  7. K osow. Irving L. Electric Machinery atuf Tmnsjormers. E nglewood ClilTs. N .J.: Prentice-H all.  1972.  8. M cPherson. George. An Introduction 10 Electrical Machines and Tmnsfonner s. N ew York:  Wiley. 1981.  9. Siskind. Charles S. Direct-Current Machinery. N ew York: M cGraw- H ill. 1952.  10. Siemon. G. R .• and A. Straughen. Electr
ic Machines. Reading. M ass.: Addison-Wesley. 1980.  II. Werninck. E . H . (ed.). Electric MOlOr Handbook. London: M cGraw- H ili. 1978.  C H A PT E R  10  SING L E -PH ASE A ND  SPEC IA L-PU RP OSE  MO TO R S  C hapters 4 through 7 were devoted to the operation orthe two major classes of  ac ma chines (synchronous and induction) on three-phase power systems.  M otors and generators of these types are by far the mo st comm on ones in larger  comm ercial and industrial settings. H owever, m ost h
ome s and small businesses  do not have three-phase power available. For such locations, all m otors mu st run  from single-phase power sources. nlis chapter deals with the theory and operation  of two major types of single-phase motors: the universal motor and the single­ phase induction motor. T he universal motor, which is a straightforward extension  of the series de m otor, is described in Section 10.1.  Th e single-phase induction motor is described in Sections 10.2 to 10.5. T he  major pr
oblem associated with the design of single-phase induction motors is that,  unlike three-phase power sources, a single-phase source does not produce a rotat­ ing ma gnetic field. Instead, the ma gnetic field produced by a single-phase source  remains stationary in position and pulses with time. Since there is no net rotating  ma gnetic field, conventional induction motors cannot function, and special de­ signs are necessary.  In addition, there are a number of special-purpose m otors which have 
not  been previously covered. T hese include reluctance motors, hysteresis m otors,  stepper m otors, and brushless dc m otors. 1lley are included in Section 10.6.  633  634 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  v,  ""CURE 10-1  Equivalent cin;uit of a univeTS3.1 motor.  10.1 TH E UNIVE R SA L MO TO R  Perhaps the simplest approach to the design of a motor that will operate on a  single-phase ac power source is to take a dc ma chine and run it from an ac supply.  R ecall from Chapter 8 that the ind
uced torque of a dc m otor is given by  (8-49)  If the polarity of the voltage applied to a shunt or series dc m otor is reversed, both  the direction of the field flux and the direction of the armature current reverse, and  the resulting induced torque continues in the same direction as before. Th erefore,  it should be possible to achieve a pulsating but unidirectional torque from a dc  motor connected to an ac power supply.  Such a design is practical only for the series dc m otor (see Figure
 10- 1),  since the annature current and the field current in the ma chine mu st reverse at ex­ actly the sam e time. For shunt dc m otors, the very high field inductance tends to  delay the reversal of the field current and thus to unacceptably reduce the average  induced torque of the m otor.  In order for a series dc motor to function effectively on ac, its field poles  and stator frame mu st be completely laminated. If they were not completely lam­ inated, their core losses would be enonnous
. Wh en the poles and stator are lami­ nated, this motor is often called a universal motor, since it can run from either an  ac or a dc source.  When the motor is running from an ac source, the commutation will be  mu ch poorer than it would be with a dc source. T he extra sparking at the brushes  is caused by transfonner action inducing voltages in the coils undergoing com­ mutation. The se sparks significantly shorten brush life and can be a source of  radio-frequency interference in certain e
nvironments.  A typical torque-speed characteristic of a universal m otor is shown in Fig­ ure 10-2. It differs from the torque-speed characteristic of the sam e ma chine op­ erating from a dc voltage source for two reasons:  I. T he armature and field windings have quite a large reactance at 50 or 60 H z.  A significant part of the input voltage is dropped across these reactances, and  therefore Ell is smaller for a given input voltage during ac operation than it is  during dc operation. Since 
Ell = Kcpw , the m otor is slower for a given  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 635  " Series IX motor  """"""  Universal motor .........  (AC supply) ........................ ...  ""GURE 10-2  Comparison of the torque-speed  characteristic of a universal motor  when operating from ac and dc  L ________________ Tind power supplies.  annature current and induced torque on alternating current than it wou ld be  on direct current.  2. In addition, the peak voltage of an ac system is V2 ti
mes its nn s value, so  ma gnetic saturation could occur near the peak current in the ma chine. This  saturation could significantly lowe r the nn s nux of the m otor for a given cur­ rent level, tending to reduce the ma chine's induced torque. R ecall that a de­ crease in flux increases the speed of a dc ma chine, so this effect ma y partially  offset the speed decrease caused by the first effect.  Applications of Un iversal Motors  Th e universal m otor has the sharply drooping torque-speed ch
aracteristic of a dc  series m otor, so it is not suitable for constant-speed applications. H owever, it is  compa ct and gives m ore torque per ampere than any other single-phase m otor. It  is therefore used where light weight and high torque are important.  Typical applications for this m otor are vacuum cleaners, drills, similar  portable tools, and kitchen appliances.  Speed Control of Universal Motors  As with dc series m otors, the best way to control the speed of a universal m otor is  t
o vary its nns input voltage. The higher the rms input voltage, the greater the re­ sulting speed of the motor. Typical torque-speed characteristics of a universal m o­ tor as a function of voltage are show n in Figure 10-3.  In practice, the average voltage applied to such a m otor is varied with one  of the SCR or TRIAC circuits introduced in Chapter 3. Two such speed control  circuits are show n in Figure 10-4. TIle variable resistors show n in these figures  are the speed adjustment knobs of
 the m otors (e.g., such a resistor wou ld be the  trigger of a variable-speed dri II).  636 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  v,  v,  v,  '--------''--------------',,------___ Tjoo  ""GU R E 10-3  The effect of changing teffilinal voltage on the torque-speed characteristic of a universal motor.  +  /. ~c  0,  ,n D,  = = C ~DIAC  (a)  L, (series field)  C;)  - s C R  D2 is a free­ wheeling diode  to control inductive  k:ick: effects.  +~----~------------,  Rc  + v (t)  TRIAC  C  ,b,  ""GU 
R E 10-4  Sample universal motor speed-control ci["(;uits. (a) H alf-wave; (b) full-wave.  o  o  o  SINGLE-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 637  Stator  o  o  FlGURE 10-5  Construction of a single-phase induction  motor. The rotor is the same as in a three­ phase induction motor. but the stator has  only a single distributed phase.  10.2 INTRODUCTION TO SINGLE-PHASE  INDUCTION MOTORS  Anoth er comm on single-phase m otor is the single-phase version of the induction  m otor. An induction mot or 
with a squirrel-cage rotor and a single-phase stator is  shown in Figure 10-5.  Single-phase induction motors suffer from a severe handicap. Since there is  only one phase on the stator winding, the ma gnetic field in a single-phase induc­ tion motor does not rotate. Instead, it pulses, getting first larger and then smaller,  but always remaining in the same direction. Because there is no rotating stator  ma gnetic field, a single-phase induction m otor has no staning torque.  This fact is easy 
to see from an examination of the m otor when its rotor is  stationary. The stator flux of the ma chine first increases and then decreases, but it  always points in the same direction. Since the stator ma gnetic field does not ro­ tate, there is no relative motion between the stator field and the bars of the rotor.  Th erefore, there is no induced voltage due to relative m otion in the rotor, no rotor  current flow due to relative motion, and no induced torque. A ctually, a voltage is  induced i
n the rotor bars by transfonner action (df/JIdt), and since the bars are  short-circuited, current flows in the rotor. H ow ever, this ma gnetic field is lined up  with the stator ma gnetic field, and it produces no net torque on the rotor,  "rind = kBR X Bs  = kBRB S sin "y  = kBRB S sin 180 0  = 0  (4-58)  At stall conditions, the m otor loo ks like a transformer with a short-circuited sec­ ondary winding (see Figure 10-6).  638 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  II,  FlGURE 10-6  The single-pha
se induction motor at  starting conditions. The stator winding  induces opposing voltages and currents into  the rotor cirwit. resulting in a rotor  magnetic field lined up with the stator  magnetic field. 7;M = O.  TIle fact that single-phase induction motors have no intrinsic starting torque  was a serious impedim ent to early development of the induction motor. Wh en in­ duction m otors were first being developed in the late l880s and early 1890s, the  first available ac power systems were 13
3-H z, single-phase. With the materials  and techniques then available, it was imp ossible to build a m otor that worked  well. The induction motor did not become an off-the-shelf working product until  three-phase, 25-H z power systems were developed in the mid-189Os.  H owever, once the rotor begins to tum, an induced torque w ill be produced  in it. TIlere are two basic theories which explain why a torque is produced in the  rotor once it is turning. One is called the double-revolving-field t
heory of single­ phase induction m otors, and the other is called the cross-field theory of single­ phase induction motors. E.1.ch of these approaches will be described below.  The Double-Revolving-Field Theory of  Single-Phase Induction Motors  TIle double-revolving-field theory of single-phase induction motors basically  states that a stationary pulsating ma gnetic field can be resolved into two rotating  ma gnetic fields, each of equal ma gnitude but rotating in opposite directions. The  indu
ction motor responds to each ma gnetic field separately, and the net torque in  the ma chine will be the sum of the torques due to each of the two ma gnetic fields.  Figure 10-7 shows how a stationary pulsating ma gnetic field can be re­ solved into two equal and oppositely rotating ma gnetic fields. Th e flux density of  the stationary ma gnetic field is given by  ,  B s (t) = (B mn cos wt) J  A clockwise-rotating ma gnetic field can be expressed as  (10-1)  0,  0- lie ...  /'  "  W W  (:1)  ",
 ,d,  FIGURE 10-7  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 639  "- W  II,  ,b,  ", ,.,  "- W  "- \ ) o- W W  , "  ( \  "ow 1--------1 "_  ,f,  The resolution of a single pulsating magnetic field into two magnetic fields of equal magnitude by  rotation in opposite directions. Notice that at all times the vector sum of the two magnetic fields lies  in the vertical plane.  B ew (r) = (t B max cos wt)i - (t B max sin wi fi (10-2)  and a counlerclockwise-rotating ma gnetic field can be expressed a
s  B cew(t) = (1 Bmax cos wt)i + (1 B max sin wi fi (10-3)  N otice that the sum of the clockwise and counterclockwise ma gnetic fields is  equal to the stationary pulsating ma gnetic field Bs:  8,(1) ~ B~(I) + B ccwCt) (IO-d)  TIle torque-speed characteristic of a three-phase induction m otor in re­ sponse to its single rotating ma gnetic field is show n in Figure 10--8a. A single­ phase induction motor responds to each of the two ma gnetic fields present within  it, so the net induced torque i
n the m otor is the difference between the two  torque-speed curves. This net torque is show n in Figure lO--8b. N otice that there  is no net torque at zero speed, so this m otor has no starting torque.  TIle torque-speed characteristic show n in Figure 1 0--8b is not quite an ac­ curate description of the torque in a single-phase m otor. It was formed by the  640 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ----------------------t----------------'------'.  ----------- ""GURE 10-8  ,,'  --,  " ' , , , , 
, , -' , " , --- , ,  --------------- ,b,  (a) The torque-speed characteristic of a three-phase induction motor. (b) The torque-speed  characteristic curves of the two equal and oppositely rota.ting stator magnetic fields.  superposition of two three-phase characteristics and ignored the fact that both  ma gnetic fields are present simultaneously in the single-phase m otor.  If power is applied to a three-phase m otor while it is forced to turn back­ ward, its rotor currents will be very high (s
ee Figure 10--9a). H oweve r, the rotor  frequency is also very high, making the rotor's reactance mu ch mu ch larger than  its resistance. Since the rotor's reactance is so very high, the rotor current lags the  rotor voltage by almost 900, pnxlucing a ma gnetic field that is nearly 180 0  from  the stator ma gnetic field (see Figure 10-10). T he induced torque in the m otor is  proportional to the sine of the angle between the two fields, and the sine of an an­ gle near 180 0  is a very sma ll
 number. TIle m otor's torque would be very sma ll, ex­ cept that the extremely high rotor currents partially offset the effect of the ma g­ netic field angles (see Figure 10-9b).  On the other hand, in a single-phase m otor, both the forward and the reverse  ma gnetic fields are present and both are produced by the same current.llle forward  SINGLE-PHASE AND SPECIAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 641  - n,j'DC  ,,'  PF =cosfl =sinll  '. '.~ ,b,  fo'IGURE 10-9  The torque-speed characteristic of a  three-phase 
induction motor is  proportional to both the strength of the  rotor magnetic field and the sine of the  angle between the fields. When the  rotor is turned bad:waro. IN and Is are  '.  very high. but the angle between the  '.~ fields is very large. and that angle  '0' limits the torque of the motor.  and reverse ma gnetic fields in the m otor each contribute a component to the total  voltage in the stator and, in a sense, are in series with each other. Because both  ma gnetic fields are present,
 the forward-rotating ma gnetic field (which has a high  effective rotor resistance Ris) will limit the stator current now in the m otor (which  produces both the forward and reverse fields). Since the current supplying the re­ verse stator ma gnetic field is limited to a small value and since the reverse rotor  ma gnetic field is at a very large angle with respect to the reverse stator ma gnetic  field, the torque due to the reverse ma gnetic fields is very small near synchronous  speed. A more
 accurate torque-speed characteristic for the single-phase induction  m otor is shown in Figure 10-11.  In addition to the average net torque show n in Figure 10-11, there are torque  pulsations at twice the stator frequency. 1l1ese torque pulsations are caused when  the forward and reverse ma gnetic fields cross each other twice each cycle. Al­ though these torque pulsations pnxluce no average torque, they do increase vibra­ tion, and they make single-phase induction m otors noisier than three-
phase m otors  of the same size. 1l1ere is no way to eliminate these pulsations, since instantaneous  power always come s in pulses in a single-phase circuit. A m otor designer mu st al­ low for this inherent vibration in the m echanical design of single-phase m otors.  642 ELE CT RIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  D irection of magnetic w 0,  field rotation P lane of maximum EI/ , • ~ D irection of •  rotor rotati0/-j 0 0 Voltage  • , @ polarity  "  , ,  "  II .. , @ •  P lane of  , , maximum 11/  ,  
Current , Current ,  polarity  "  , @ polarity ,  X ,  0 , @ ,  X , 0  X X  Voltage  polarity  0,  ""GUR E 111-10  When the rotor of the motor is forced to turn backwmd. the angle r between 111/ and B s approaches  180°.  1";00 Forward  .... ".".". "..  , ,  ( CUn-ll  ,-, , , , , , , , , , ,  / '  ----------------.--+=~-~¥-=----__+.c_ '. - n,}'DC _____ __ _________ n.y""  /'"..". .... -­ ,  , , , , , , , ' \  , , , ,  '-' R everse  curve  ""GUR E III-II  The torque--speed characteristic of a sin
gle-phase induction nx>toT. taking into account the current  limitation on the backward-rotating magnetic field caused by the presence of the forward-rotating  magnetic field.  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 643  The Cross-Field Theory of  Single-Phase Induction Motors  The cross-field theory of single-phase induction motors looks at the induction m o­ tor from a totally different point of view. 1l1is theory is concerned with the volt­ ages and currents that the stationary stator ma 
gnetic field can induce in the bars of  the rotor when the rotor is movin g.  Consider a single-phase induction mot or with a rotor which has been  brought up to speed by some external method. Such a m otor is show n in Figure  1O -12a. Vo ltages are induced in the bars of this rotor, with the peak voltage oc­ curring in the windings passing directly under the stator windings. 1l1ese rotor  voltages produce a current now in the rotor, but because of the rotor's high reac­ tance, the current lags
 the voltage by almost 90°. Since the rotor is rotating at  nearly synchronous speed, that 90° time lag in current produces an almost 90° an­ gular shift between the plane of peak rotor voltage and the plane of peak current.  Th e resulting rotor ma gnetic field is show n in Figure 1O -12b.  Th e rotor ma gnetic field is som ew hat smaller than the stator ma gnetic field,  because of the losses in the rotor, but they differ by nearly 90° in both space and  current  FIGU RE 10-12  P lane of  max 
IR  voltage-----....  \ ' ,  P lane of  maximum  . I  E,  (a) The development of induced torque in a single-phase induction nx>tor. as explained by the cross­ field theocy. If the stator field is pulsing, it will induce voltages in the rot<r bars. as shown by the marks  inside the rotor. H oy/ever. the rotor current is delayed by nearly 90" behind the rotor voltage, and if the  rotor is turning, the rotor current will peak at an angle different from that of the rotor voltage.  644 ELECTR IC M AC
 HINE R Y RJNDA M ENTALS  B s (stationary)  w.  ~ .  Maximum rotor currem  I,  • o  @  '0  •  o  •  Plane of  maximum  voltage  / ~:>"--r'-' Rmm  Rotor  volta.ges  ""GU R E 10-12 (concluded)  -~.  voltages  (b'  (b) This delayed rotor current produces a rotor magoetic field at an angle different from the angle of  the stator magnetic field.  I I. I ,  / "'\IUR I /'\  /  , , , ,  ""GU R E 10-13  '\ "  I  , , , , , , , , , , ,  , 9<Y'  190\  \ )~ I , , , , , , ,  \.../  UR lags "5 by about 80  (a)
  ,  , , , , ,  (a) The magnitudes of the magnetic fields as a function of time.  w,  ''''''  time. If these two ma gnetic fields are added at different times, one sees that the 10- tal ma gnetic field in the motor is rotating in a counterclockwise direction (see Fig­ ure 10- 13). With a rotating ma gnetic field present in the m otor, the induction  80'  ",t=OO  ",1=90°  wt= ISOo  lis = II .. ,  ",t = 270°  wl=360°  FIGURE 10-13 (conclud ... >d)  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 645  I
I,  II,  ,b,  wt=45°  wl= 135°  0,  "'t=225°  ",t=315°  II .. ,  (b) The vector sum of the rotor and stator magne tic fields at various times. showing a net magnetic  field which rotates in a counterclockwise direction.  motor will develop a net torque in the direction of m otion, and that torque will  keep the rotor turning.  If the m otor's rotor had originally been turned in a clockwise direction, the  resulting torque wou ld be clockwise and wou ld again keep the rotor turning.  646 ELECTR I
C MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  10.3 STARTIN G SING LE-PH AS E  IND UC TION MOTOR S  As previously explained, a single-phase induction motor has no intrinsic starting  torque. TIlere are three techniques comm only used to start these m otors, and  single-phase induction motors are classified according to the methods used to pro­ duce their starting torque. T hese starting techniques differ in cost and in the  amount of starting torque produced, and an engineer normally uses the least ex­ pensive tech
nique that m eets the torque requirements in any given application.  TIle three major starting techniques are  I. Split-phase windings  2. Capacitor-type windings  3. Shaded stator poles  All three starting techniques are methods of making one of the two revolv­ ing ma gnetic fields in the m otor stronger than the other and so giving the motor  an initial nudge in one direction or the other.  Split-Phase W indings  A split-phase m otor is a single-phase induction motor with two stator windings, 
a  main stator winding (M) and an auxiliary starting winding (A ) (see Figure 10- 14).  TIlese two windings are set 90 electrical degrees apart along the stator of the  motor, and the auxiliary winding is designed to be sw itched oul of the circuit at  some set speed by a centrifugal sw itch. TIle auxiliary winding is designed to have  +  1·1  R. < ,.  VAC  ,  ~.  jXM a 5·  ~  ~ I. I  ""GU R E 10-14  Auxiliary winding  jX" R,  (a)  ,b,  -I,  V  Centrifugal  switch  (a) A split-phase induction mo
tor. (b) The currents in the motor at starting conditions.  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 647  a higher resistance/reactance ratio than the main winding, so that the current in the  auxiliary winding leads the current in the main winding. This higher RIX ratio is  usually accomplished by using smaller wire for the auxiliary winding. Sma ller  wire is pennissible in the auxiliary winding because it is used only for starting and  therefore does not have to take full current continuous
ly.  To understand the function of the auxiliary winding, refer to Figure 10-15.  Since the current in the auxiliary winding leads the current in the main winding,  300%  ®  ®  ®  ®  0  Line  fvoItage  /,,-, ~_I,'/  / /" \ "-, /  , "-, , , ,  M ain plus  starting winding  ,  200% ~_""--- 100%  M ain  winding  alone  FIGU RE 10-15  ".  ®  0 0  ,.,  '- , ,  ,b,  ,  ,.,  Auxiliary  winding  M ain winding  0  II,  0  Centrifugal switch  , , , , ,  (a) Relationship of main and auxiliary magnetic fiel
ds. (b) I .. peaks before 1M • producing a net  counterclockwise rotation of the magnetic fields. (c) The resulting torque-speed characteristic.  648  ELECTRIC  MACHINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  "" GU R E 10-16  Cutaway view  of  a split-phase motor. showing the main and auxiliary windings and the centrifugal  switch. (Courtesy  of  Westinghouse Electric Corpomtion.)  the ma gnetic field BA peaks before the main ma gne ti c field  B M .  Since BA peaks  first and  th en  B M ,  Ih ere is a net counterclo
ckwise rotation  in  the ma gne ti c field.  In  other words, the auxi li ary winding mak es  one  of  the oppositely rotating stator  ma gnetic  fi elds larger than the other one and provides a net starting torque for the  moto r.  A Iypica ll orque-speed characteris ti c is show n  in  Fi gure  1O -I Sc.  A culaway diagram  of  a split-phase m otor is sh ow n  in  Fi gure 10-16.  It  is  easy to see the main and auxi li ary windings (the auxi li ary windings are the  smaller-diameler wires) an
d  th e cenlrifugal sw it ch that cuts the auxiliary windings  o ul  of the circ uit  when the m otor approaches operating speed.  Sp lit -phase m otors have a moderate starting torque with a fairly l ow  start­ in g current. Th ey are used for applications which do  not  require very  hi gh starting  torques, such as fans, blowers, and cenlrifugal pumps.  1ll ey are available for sizes  in  the fractional-horsepowe r range and are quite inexpensive.  I n a split-phase induc ti on motor, the cur
rent  in  th e auxi li ary windings always  peaks before the current  in  th e main winding, and therefore  th e ma gnetic field from  the auxiliary winding always peaks before the  ma gne ti c field from the main wind­ in g. Th e direction  of  rotation  of  the m otor is detennined  by  whether the space an­ gie of the ma gnetic field from the auxi li ary winding is 90° ahead or 90° behind the  angle of the main winding. Since that angle can  be  changed from 90° ahead to 90°  behind just  by 
 sw it c hin g  th e co nn ec ti ons on the auxiliary winding,  the direction  of  rotation  of  the  nwtor  can be reversed by switching the connections  of  the auxiliary  winding  while leaving  th e main winding's co nn ec ti ons  un changed.   SING L E-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 649  +o---~--~-------------------,  1·1 Centrifugal  R.  i  sWI tch  C  Auxiliary winding  ,,'  I.  'h'  FIGU R E 10-17  (a) A capacitor-start induction motor. (b) Current .angles at starting in this motor.  
C apacitor-Start M otors  For some applications, the starting torque supplied by a split-phase m otor is insuf­ ficient to start the load on a m otor's shaft. In those cases, capacitor-start motors  may be used (Figure 10-17). In a capacitor-start m otor, a capacitor is placed in se­ ries with the auxiliary winding of the m otor. By proper selection of capacitor size,  the ma gnetom otive force of the starting current in the auxiliary winding can be ad­ justed to be equal to the mag netom otive 
force of the current in the main winding,  and the phase angle of the current in the auxiliary winding can be made to lead the  current in the main winding by 90°. Since the two windings are physically sepa­ rated by 90°, a 90° phase difference in current will yield a single unifonn rotating  stator ma gnetic field, and the m otor will behave just as though it were starting from  a three-phase power source. In this case, the starting torque of the motor can be  m ore than 300 percent of its rate
d value (see Figure 10-18).  Capacitor-start m otors are more expensive than split-phase motors, and they  are used in applications where a high starting torque is absolutely required. Typi­ cal applications for such m otors are compre ssors, pump s, air conditioners, and  other pieces of equipment that m ust start under a load. (See Figure 10-19.)  650 ELECTR IC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ,~  400%  M ain and aUXilip winding  V  300% , ,  ~ ,  200%  '\  , , , , ,  100%  ~ ,  ,  ~  ,  -(' , --------
 Main winding only Switch ,~  ""GURE 10-18  Torque-speed characteristic of a capacitor-start induction motor.  Permanent Split-Ca pacitor and Ca pacitor-Start,  Ca pacitor-Run Motors  Th e starting capacitor does such a good jo b of improving Ihe torque-speed char­ acteristic of an induction mot or that an auxiliary winding with a smaller capacitor  is sometime s left pennanently in the m olor circuit. If the capacitor's value is cho­ sen correctly, such a m otor will have a perfectly unifonn ro
tating ma gnetic field  at some specific load, and it will behave just like a three-phase induction motor at  that point. Such a design is called a pennanent split-capacitor or capacitor-start­ and-run mot or (Figure 10-20). Pennan ent split-capacitor m otors are simpler than  capacitor-start m otors, since the starting sw itch is not needed. At normal loads,  Ihey are mor e efficient and have a higher power factor and a sm oother torque than  ordinary single-phase induction mot ors.  H ow ever,
 pennanent split-capacitor m olors have a lower starting torque Ihan  capacitor-start m otors, since the capacitor mu st be sized to balance lhe currents in  the main and auxiliary windings at normal-load conditions. Since the starting cur­ rent is mu ch greater than the nonnal-load current, a capacitor that balances the  phases under nonnal loads leaves them very unbalanced under starting conditions.  If both the largest possible starting lorque and the best running conditions  are needed, two 
capacitors can be used with the auxiliary winding. M otors with  two capacitors are called capacitor-stan, capacitor-run, or two-value capacitor  m otors (Figure 10-2 1). TIle larger capacitor is present in the circuit only during  starting, wh en it ensures that Ihe currents in the main and auxiliary windings are  roughly balanced, yielding very high starting torques. When Ihe m otor gets up 10  speed, the cenlrifugal switch opens, and the pennanent capacitor is left by itself in  the auxiliary
 winding circuit. TIle pennanent capacitor is just large enough to bal­ ance the currents at nonnal m otor loads, so the motor again operates efficienlly  with a high torque and power factor. TIle pennanent capacitor in such a m otor is  typically about 10 10 20 percent of the size of the starting capacitor.  Sh,"  !(oy  R otor Assembly  Rotllling} Staning  Switch  FIGURE  10 - 19  SING LE-PHA SE A ND SPECI A L-PURP OS E M O TORS  651  (' J  Shaft E nd  (Rear)  End  B rack et  I Phase T.E . F. e
.  motor  capa.citor start  exploded view  general purpose  56  frame  Stator Assembly  Starting Capacitor  Capacitor Cover  / -- Capacitor Cover M ounting Screws  _ ~::::~;:- ~Stationary  Starting Switch  ;:  Tenninat Board  Front End  Bmcket  F an  Shroud  (b J  F an  Shroud  M ounting Screws  (a) A capa.citor-start induction ntotor.  (Courtesy  of  Emerson Electric Company.)  (b)  Ex ploded view  of  a capacitor-start induction motor.  (Courtesy  of  Westinghouse Electric Corpomtion.)  The di
rec ti on of  ro ta ti on  of  any capac it or-type m otor m ay  be  reversed  by  sw it c hin g  th e co nn ec ti ons  of  it s aux ili ary w in d in gs.   652 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  I.j  R. ~  ~ ~ < ,. ,  ~. 0 ~ C ~ ,  ~':l:/  jX.  ~  Auxiliary win~i~g  jX, R, I,  (a)  '00  400 %  300 %  100  % /'  '" / \ %  /'  \  200  '.~  'h'  ""GURE 10-20  (a) A permanent split-capacitor induction ntotor. (b) Torque-speed characteristic of this motor.  Shad ed-Pole M otors  A shaded-pole induct
ion motor is an induction molor with only a main winding.  Instead of having an auxiliary winding, it has salient poles, and one portion of  each pole is surrounded by a short-circuited coil called a shading coil (see Figure  1O -22a). A time-varying flux is induced in Ihe poles by the main winding. When  the pole flux varies, it induces a voltage and a current in the shading coil which  opposes Ihe original change in flUX.1llis opposition retards the flux changes un­ der the shaded portions of 
the coils and therefore produces a slighl imbalance be­ tween Ihe two oppositely rotating stator ma gnetic fields. TIle net rolation is in Ihe  direction from the unshaded to the shaded portion of the pole face. T he  torque-speed characteristic of a shaded-po le m olar is show n in Figure IO-22b.  Shaded poles produce less starting torque than any other type of induction  m otor starting system. TIley are mu ch less efficient and have a mu ch higher slip  SING LE-PHA SE A ND SPECI A L-PURP OS E
 M O TORS 653  - ~ '). I  RM < I' 7 '\ '\ ,.  " ~. := " c_  ~  " "" 5/  jXM 00 ,  (.,  fjmd  400 %  Starting and running capacitors  %  / Y" \ % , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,  300  2llll  (00 % ,  _---<-R unmng , , , , --- capacitors , , ,  Switch "~  (b'  F IGURE 10-21  (a) A capacitor-start. capacitor-run induction motor. (b) Torque-speed characteristic of this motor.  than other types of single-phase induction motors. Such poles are used only in  very sm all m otors (Y..o hp and less) w ith
 very low starting torque requirem ents.  Wh ere it is possible to use them , shaded-pole m otors are the cheapest design  available.  B ecause shaded-pole m otors rely on a shading coil for their starting torque,  there is no easy way to reverse the direction of rotation of such a m otor. To  achieve reversal, it is necessary to install two shading coils on each pole face and  to selectively short one or the other of them. See Figures 10-23 and 10-24.  Co mp arison of Single-Phase Indu ction Mo
 tors  Single-phase induction motors m ay be ranked from best to worst in tenns of their  starting and running characteristics:  I. Capacitor-start, capacitor-run m otor  2. Capacitor-start m otor  654  ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY  RJND A MENT ALS  300%  200%  Stator winding  ,,'  "-------------------------~--- "m  ".""  ,b,  ""G UR E 10-22  (a) A basic shaded-pole induction motor.  (b)  The resulting torque-speed characteristic.  I  Phase. shaded pole  special purpose  42  frame motor  Self-aligning
  sleeve bearing  HFR -~~  lubricant  ""G UR E 10- 23  Shading  coil  "V"  skew  rotor  Cutaway view  of  a shaded-pole induction motor.  (Courtesy ofWestin8lwuse Electric Corporation.)   S IN G LE-PHA SE A ND SPECI A L-PURP OS E M O TORS  655  Slot cell insulation  Automatic reset thermal  overload protector  I Phase. shaded pole  special purpose 42 frame  stator assembly  +  rotor assembly  ,', m oo.';",~,  thennal overload protector  Shading coil  Shaded portion  of  pole face  (.,  I Phase  
shaded pole 42 frame  wound stator  Slot cell insulation  Shading coil  (5)  ______  ~  (b'  FIG URE  10 - 14  Close-up views  of  the construction  of  a four-pole shaded-pole induction motor.  (Courtesy  of  Watinghouse Electric Corporation.)  3. Pennane nt  sp lit -capac it or m otor  4.  Sp lit -phase m otor  S. Shaded-pole m otor   656 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Naturally, the best motor is also the m ost expensive, and the wor st motor is the  least expensive. Also, not all these sta
rting techniques are available in all motor  size ranges. It is up to the design engineer to select the cheapest available m otor  for any given application that will do the job.  10.4 SPEED CONTROL OF SINGLE-PHASE  INDUCTION MOTORS  In general, the speed of single-phase induction m otors may be controlled in the  same manner as the speed of polyphase induction mot ors. For squirrel-cage rotor  mot ors, the following techniques are available:  I. Vary the stator frequency.  2. Chan ge the number
 of poles.  3. Chan ge the applied tenninal voltage V T .  In practical designs involving fairly high-slip m otors, the usual approach to  speed control is to vary the terminal voltage of the m otor. 1lle voltage applied to  a m otor may be varied in one of three way s:  I. An autotransformer may be used to continually adjust the line voltage. nlis  is the m ost expensive m ethexl of voltage speed control and is used only when  very smooth speed control is needed.  2. An SCR or TRI AC circuit ma
y be used to reduce the nn s voltage applied to  the m otor by ac phase control. nlis approach chops up the ac wav efonn as  described in Chapter 3 and somewhat increases the mot or's noise and vibra­ tion. Solid-state control circuits are considerably cheaper than autotransfonn­ ers and so are becoming more and m ore comm on.  3. A resistor may be inserted in series with the mot or's stator circuit. This is the  cheapest m ethexl of voltage control, but it has the disadvantage that consider­ ab
le power is lost in the resistor, reducing the overall power conversion  efficiency.  Another technique is also used with very high-slip m otors such as shaded­ pole m otors. Instead of using a separate autotransformer to vary the voltage ap­ plied to the stator of the m otor, the stator winding itself can be used as an auto­ transfonner. Figure 10--25 show s a schematic representation of a main stator  winding, with a number of taps along its length. Since the stator winding is  wrapped about a
n iron core, it behaves as an autotransfonner.  Wh en the full line voltage V is applied across the entire main winding, then  the induction m otor operates normally. Suppose instead that the full line voltage is  applied to tap 2, the center tap of the winding.1llen an identical voltage will be in­ duced in the upper half of the winding by transformer action, and the total winding  Tap I  + +  V  - 2V +  V  oltage /" V  apphed  300%  2llll%  100%  FIGU R E 10-26  T",2  SING L E-PHASE AND SPEC I
AL-PURPOSE MOTORS 657  Ferromagnetic core  Jo'IGU R E 10-25  The use of a stator winding as an  autotransformer. If voltage V is applied to the  winding at the center tap. the total winding  voltage will he 2V.  ~~ _ _____ ~_ Vo  Vo  Vo  The torque-speed characteristic of a shaded-pole induction motor as the terminal voltage is changed.  Increases in VTmay he accomplished either by actually raising the voltage across the whole winding  or by switching to a lower tap on the stator winding.  volta
ge will be twice the applied line voltage.1lle total voltage applied to the wind­ ing has effectively been doubled.  T herefore, the smaller the fraction of the total coil that the line voltage is  applied across, the greater the total voltage will be across the who le winding, and  the higher the speed of the m otor will be for a given load (see Figure 10-26).  T his is the standard approach used to control the speed of single-phase m o­ tors in man y fan and blowe r applications. Such speed co
ntrol has the advantage  that it is quite inexpensive, since the only comp onents necessary are taps on the  main m otor winding and an ordinary multiposition sw itch. It also has the advan­ tage that the autotransformer effect does not consum e power the way series resis­ tors wou ld.  658 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  10.5 THE CIRCUIT MODEL OF A  SINGLE-P HA SE IND UCTION MOTOR  As previously described, an understanding of the induced torque in a single-phase  induction motor can be achieve
d through either the double-revolving-field theory  or the cross-field theory of single-phase m otors. Either approach can lead to an  equivalent circuit of the motor, and the torque-speed characteristic can be derived  through either method.  TIlis section is restricted to an examination of an equivalent circuit based on  the double-revolving-field theory- in fact, to only a special case of that theory.  W e will develop an equivalent circuit of the main winding of a single-phase in­ duction mo
tor wh en it is operating alone. The technique of symm etrical compo­ nents is necessary to analyze a single-phase motor with both main and auxiliary  windings present, and since symmetrical compon ents are beyond the scope of this  book, that case will not be discussed. For a m ore detailed analysis of single-phase  motors, see R eference 4.  TIle best wa y to begin the analysis of a single-phase induction m otor is to  consider the m otor when it is stalled. At that time, the m otor appears to
 be just a  single-phase transfonner with its secondary circuit shorted out, and so its equiva­ lent circuit is that of a transformer. This equivalent circuit is shown in Figure  100027a. In this figure, R l and X l are the resistance and reactance of the stator  winding, XM is the ma gnetizing reactance, and R l and X2 are the referred values of  the rotor's resistance and reactance. Th e core losses of the ma chine are not shown  and will be lumped together with the m echanical and stray losse
s as a part of the  motor's rotational losses.  N ow recall that the pulsating air-gap flux in the m otor at stall conditions can  be resolved into two equal and opposite ma gnetic fields within the m otor. Since  these fields are of equal size, each one contributes an equal share to the resistive  and reactive voltage drops in the rotor circuit. It is possible to split the rotor  equivalent circuit into two sections, each one corresponding to the effects of one  of the ma gnetic fields. The m o
tor equivalent circuit with the effects of the forward  and reverse ma gnetic fields separated is shown in Figure 10--27b.  Now suppose that the m otor's rotor begins to turn with the help of an auxil­ iary winding and that the winding is switched out again after the motor come s up  to speed. As derived in Chapter 7, the effective rotor resistance of an induction  motor depends on the amount of relati ve m otion between the rotor and the stator  ma gnetic fields. H ow ever, there are two ma gne
tic fields in this m otor, and the  amount of relative motion differs for each of them.  For the fOlward ma gnetic field, the per-unit difference between the rotor  speed and the speed of the ma gnetic field is the slip s, where slip is defined in the  sam e manner as it wa s for three-phase induction m otors. Th e rotor resistance in  the part of the circuit associated with the forward ma gnetic field is thus O.5R.Js.  TIle forward ma gnetic field rotates at speed n.ync and the reverse ma gneti
c  field rotates at speed -n.ync. TIlerefore, the total per-unit difference in speed (on a  base of n.ync) between the forward and reverse ma gnetic fields is 2. Since the rotor  SING L E-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 659  I, I,  - -+  R, jX ] + jX2  V E , jXM R,  (a)  I,  -+  R, jX] +  E" jO.5XM 0.5R2 Forward  - V + jO.5X2  E" jO.5XM ~ 0.5R2 Reverse  - ,b,  FIGU R E 10-27  (a) The equivalent circuit of a single-phase induction motor at standstill. Only its main windings are  energized. (b) 
The equivalent circuit with the effects of the forward and reverse magnetic fields  separated.  is turning at a speed s slowe r than the forward ma gnetic field, the total per-unit dif­ ference in speed between the rotor and the reverse ma gnetic field is 2 - s. There­ fore, the effective rotor resistance in the part of the circuit associated with the re­ verse ma gnetic field is 0.SRI(2 - s).  Th e final induction motor equivalent circuit is show n in Figure 10-28.  C ircuit An alysis with the 
Single-Phase Induction  M otor E quivalent C ircuit  Th e single-phase induction motor equivalent circuit in Figure 10-28 is similar to  the three-phase equivalent circuit, except that there are both forward and back­ ward components of power and torque present. 1lle sam e general power and  torque relationships that applied for three-phase m otors also apply for either the  forward or the backward compon ents orthe single-phase m otor, and the net power  and torque in the ma chine is the differ
ence between the forward and reverse  compon ents.  Th e power-now diagram of an induction motor is repeated in Figure 10-29  for easy reference.  660 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  R,  + " +  E lF O.5ZF jO.5XM 0.5 R2 Fo rward ,  - V  + jO.5X2  E IB 0.5ZB jO.5XM 0.5 R2 R everse  2->  - ""GU R E 10-28  The equivalent cin:uit of a single-phase induction motor running at speed with only its main  windings energized.  Slator 00_  losses  ""GU R E 10-29  Rotor  copper  losses  Core  Me chanical l
osses  losses  Stray  losses  Rotational losses  The power-flow diagram of a single-phase induction motor.  To mak e Ihe calculalion of the input current flow into the m otor simpler, it  is customary to define impedan ces ZF and ZB, where ZF is a single impedan ce  equivalent to all the forward ma gnetic field impedan ce elements and ZB is a sin­ gle imp edance equivalent to all the backward ma gnetic field impedance element s  (see Figure 10-30). T hese impedan ces are given by  . (R is + jX.0
(jXM )  ZF = RF + }XF = (R is + jX2) + jXM (10-5)  -+  z, v  - +  z, V  D  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 661  Fl G URE 10-30  A series oombination of RF andJX F is the  jXp Thevenin equivalent of the forwaJd-field  impedance elements. and therefore Rr  must consume the same power from a  given current as Rlls would.  . [R I(2 - s) + jX2](jXM )  ZB = RB + JXB = [R2/(2 s) + jX21 + jXM (10-<5)  In tenn s of Zp and ZB , the current flow ing in the induction motor's stator winding is  (1
0-7)  Th e per-phase air-gap power of a three-phase induction motor is the power  consum ed in the rotor circuit resistance O.5RJs. Similarly, the forward air-gap  power of a single-phase induction motor is the power consumed by 0.5R 2/s, and  the reverse air-gap power of the m otor is the power consumed by O.5RJ(2 - s).  Th erefore, the air-gap power of the motor could be calculated by detennining the  power in the forward resistor O.5RJs, detennining the power in the reverse resis­ tor 0.5Ri(2
 - s), and subtracting one from the other.  TIle m ost difficult part of this calculation is the determination of the sepa­ rate currents flow ing in the two resistors. Fortunately, a simplification of this cal­ culation is possible. Notice that the only resistor within the circuit elem ents com­ posing the equivalent impedance Zp is the resistor Ris. Since Zp is equivalent to  that circuit, any power consum ed by ZF mu st also be consum ed by the original cir­ cuit, and since Ris is the only re
sistor i n the original circuit, its power consump­ tion mu st equal that ofimpedancc Zp. Th erefore, the air-gap power for the forward  ma gnetic field can be expressed as  662 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (10-8)  Similarly, the air-gap power for the reverse ma gnetic field can be expressed as  PAGJJ = n(0.5 R B ) (10--9)  1lle advantage of these two equations is that only the one current /1 needs to be  calculated to detennine both powers.  TIle total air-gap power in a single-phase induct
ion motor is thus  (10-10)  TIle induced torque in a three-phase induction motor can be found from the  equation  PAG  Tind = -­ w,""  where PAG is the net air-gap power given by Equation (10-10).  (10-11)  1lle rotor copper losses can be found as the sum of the rotor copper losses  due to the forward field and the rotor copper losses due to the reverse field.  (10- 12)  TIle rotor copper losses in a three-phase induction m otor were equal to the per­ unit relative motion between the rotor and t
he stator field (the slip) times the air­ gap power of the ma chine. Similarly, the forward rotor copper losses of a single­ phase induction motor are given by  P RC L•F = SP AG •F (10- 13)  and the reverse rotor copper losses of the motor are given by  (10-14)  Since these two power losses in the rotor are at different frequencies, the total ro­ tor pow er loss is just their sum.  TIle power converted from electrical to m echanical fonn in a single-phase  induction motor is given by the sam e e
quation as P.:OD¥ for three-phase induction  motors. TIlis equation is  Since Wm = (1 - s)w .ync, this equation can be reexpressed as  PC<JJI¥ = Tind(1 - s)wm  From Equation (10-11), PAG = TiDdW ,y .. ,,, so P.:oo¥ can also be expressed as  P.:ODV = (I - s) PAG  (10-15)  (10-16)  (10-17)  As in the three-phase induction motor, the shaft output power is not equal to  P.:OD¥' since the rotational losses mu st still be subtracted. In the single-phase in­ duction m otor mod el used here, the core lo
sses, me chanical losses, and stray  losses mu st be subtracted from P.:ODV in order to get POll'.  SINGLE-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 663  Example 10-1. A ~hp, lID-V, 60-Hz, six-pole, split-phase induction motor has  the following impedances:  R ] = 1.52Q  R 2 = 3.13Q  X ] =2 .100  X l = 1.56Q  XM = 58.2 Q  The core losses of this motor are 35 W, and the friction, windage, and stray losses are 16 W.  The motor is operating at the rated voltage and frequency with its starting winding open,
 and  the motor's slip is 5 percent. Find the following quantities in the motor at these conditions:  (a) Speed in revolutions per minute  (b) Stator current in amperes  (c) Stator power factor  (d) Pin  (e) PAG  (f) P_  (g) "TiOO  (h) P "'"  (i) "Tj.,.;l  0) Efficiency  Solution  The forward and reverse impedances of this motor at a slip of 5 percent are  _ . _ (Ris + jx.zXjXM )  ZF - RF + }XF - (Ris + jX2) + jXM  (3.13 flAI.05 + jl.56 0)(j58.2 0)  = (3.13 OAI.05 + jl.56 0) + j58.2 0  (62.6L 1.
43 0  OXj5S.2 0)  = (62.60 + jl.56 0) + j5S.2 0  = 39.9L50.5° 0 = 25.4 + j30.7 0  _ . _ [Rf(2 - s) + jX2](jXM )  ZB - RB + }XB - [Rf(2 s) + jX2] + jXM  (3.13 fl/1.95 + jl.56 0)(j58.2 0)  = (3.13 fl/1.95 + jl.56 0) + j58.2 0  (2.24L44.2° OXj5S.2 0)  = (1.61 0 + jl.56 0) + j5S.2 0  = 2.ISL45.9° 0 = 1.51 + jl.56 0  These values will be used to detennine the motor clUTent, power, and torque.  (a) The synchronous speed of this motor is  II = 12Qf, = 120(60 Hz ) =  .ync P 6 pole 1200 r/min  Since the 
motor is operating at 5 percent slip, its mechanical speed is  11m = (I - s)n~yDC  (10-5)  (10--6)  664 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  n .. = (I - 0.05X 1200 r/min) = 1140 r/min  (b) The stator current in this motor is  "">CCC,"or,",,<o"".i~i~O~L~O,""V~"'C-"'7<""C-"'CC"" = 1.52 n + j2.10 n + 0.5(25.4 n + j30.7 n) + 0.5(1.51 n + j1.56 n)  = .""i'iii'0,;L,O"",,VCcon - lIOLO ° V _ 466L 50 6° A 14.98 n + jI8.23 n - 23.6L50.6° n - . - .  (c) The stator power factor of this motor is  PF = cos (- 50.
6°) = 0.635 lagging  (d) The input power to this motor is  Pm = VI cos ()  = (110 VX4.66 AXO.635) = 325 W  (e) The forward-wave air-gap power is  PA G E = li(o.5 RF)  = (4.66 A)2(12.7 0) = 275.8 W  and the reverse-wave air-gap power is  PA G .B = li(o.5 R B )  = (4.66 A)2(0.755 V ) = 16.4 W  Therefore, the total air-gap power of this motor is  PAG = PAG .F - PAG.B  = 275.8 W - 16.4 W = 259.4 W  if) The power converted from electrical to mechanical fonn is  P OO<IV = (I - s) PAG  = (I - 0.05)(259
.4 W ) = 246 W  (g) The induced torque in the motor is given by  = 259.4 W = 2(x;N o  (1200r/min)(lminJ60sX27Tradlr) . m  (h) The output power is given by  POlS. = Pooov - P~ = Pooov - POOl e - P IDOCb - P_ y  = 246 W - 35 W - 16 W = 195 W  (i) The load torque of the motor is given by  p~  T_ = w".  (10--7)  (10--8)  (10-9)  (10--10)  (10--17)  (10--11 )  SINGLE-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 665  = 195W = 163N o (1140 r/minXI min/60 s)(21Tradlr) . m  OJ Finally, the efficiency of the motor a
t these conditions is  195 W  100% = 325 W x 100% = 60%  10.6 OTHER TYPES OF MOTORS  Tw o other types of motors- reluctance m otors and hysteresis motors-are used in  certain special-purpose applications. Th ese m otors differ in rotor construction  from the ones previously described, but use the same stator design. Like induction  m otors, they can be built with either single-or three-phase stators. A third type of  special-purpose m otor is the stepper mot or. A stepper m otor requires a polyp
hase  stator, but it does not require a three-phase pow er supply. Th e final special­ purpose m otor discussed is the brushless dc m otor, which as the nam e suggests  runs on a dc power supply.  Reluctance Motors  A reluctance motor is a m otor which depends on reluctance torque for its opera­ tion. Reluctance torque is the torque induced in an iron object (such as a pin) in  the presence of an external ma gnetic field, which causes the object to line up with  the external ma gnetic field. TIl
is torque occurs because the external field induces  an internal ma gnetic field in the iron of the object, and a torque appears between  the two fields, twisting the object around to line up with the external field. In or­ der for a reluctance torque to be produced in an object, it mu st be elongated along  axes at angles corresponding to the angles between adjacent poles of the external  ma gnetic field.  A simple schematic of a two-pole reluctance motor is shown in Figure  1O-3 \. It can be s
hown that the torque applied to the rotor of this m otor is pro­ portional to sin 20, where 0 is the electrical angle between the rotor and the stator  ma gnetic fields. TIlerefore, the reluctance torque ofa motor is maximum when the  angle between the rotor and the stator ma gnetic fields is 45°.  A simple reluctance motor of the sort shown in Figure 10-3 I is a synchro­ nous motor, since the rotor will be locked into the stator ma gnetic fields as long  as the pullout torque of the m otor is n
ot exceeded. Like a nonnal synchronous m o­ tor, it has no starting torque and will not start by itself.  A self-starting reluctance motor that will operate at synchronous speed  until its maximum reluctance torque is exceeded can be built by m odifying the  rotor of an induction motor as shown in Figure 10-32. In this figure, the rotor has  salient poles for steady-state operation as a reluctance motor and also has cage or  amortisseur windings for starting. TIle stator of such a motor ma y be 
either of  single- or three-phase construction. The torque-speed characteristic of this m o­ tor, which is som etimes called a synchronous induction motor, is shown in Fig­ ure 10-33.  666 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Single-phase  0'  three-phase  stator  ""GURE 10-31  ,  "iDd""sin2/i  The basic concept of a reluctance motor.  o  FIGURE 10-32  The rotor design of a "synchronous induction" or self-starting  reluctance motor.  An inleresting variation on Ihe idea of Ihe reluctance motor is Ih
e Syn­ crospeed motor, which is manufa ctured in the United States by Ma gneTek, Inc.  TIle rotor of this motor is show n in Figure 10-34. It uses "flux guides" to increase  Ihe coupling between adjacenl pole faces and therefore to increase the maximum­ reluctance lorque of the m otor. With these flux guides, Ihe maximum-r eluctance  torque is increased to about 150 percent of the rated torque, as compar ed to just  over 100 percent of the rated torque for a conventional reluctance m otor.  Hyst
eresis Motors  Another special-purpose m otor empl oys the phenomenon of hysteresis to produce  a me chanical lorque. TIle rotor of a hysteresis mot or is a sm oolh cylinder of ma g­ netic material with no teeth, protrusions, or windings. TIle stator of the m otor can  be either single- or three-phase; but if it is single-phase, a permanent capacitor  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS  667  ~ ,-------------~~---,  500  ,  400  Main and  auxiliary  ,  ,  winding  I  I "',  ,  ,  ,  ,  , 
 '  ~  f--;;:;  I  I \  ,  ,  , ,  ,  , ,  ,  ,  Varies with / I \  ,  ,  starting  I  I \  position "  ::? I \  of  rotor "  :c:  : al  \  I .  .e!  1 2!..  \  I  OJ  I'"' \  "  '"  I \  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  " M ain winding I \  ,  ,  " only I  200  100  ,  ,  O ~--~--~--~--~--~  o  20  40  60  80  100  Percentage  of  synchronous speed  (a)  FIGURE  10 -34  ""GUR E 10-33  The  torque-speed characteristic  of  a  single-phase self-starting reluctance  ntotor.  'h'  (a)  The  aluminum casting  of  
a Synchrospeed motor rotor.  (b)  A rotor lamination from the motor.  Notice the flux guides connecting the adjacent poles.  The se guides increase the reluctance torque  of  the motor.  (Courtesy  of  Ma gneTek,  Inc.)  should  be  used with an auxiliary winding to provide as smooth a ma gne ti c field as  possible, s in ce  this greatly reduces  th e losses  of  the m oto r.  Fi gure  10- 35  shows the basic operation  of  a hysteresis m otor. Wh en a  three-phase (or s in gle-phase with auxi 
li ary winding) curre nt  is applied to the sta­ tor  of  the mot or, a rotating ma gne ti c  fi eld appears within the ma chine. This rotat­ in g ma gne ti c  fi eld ma gne ti zes the meta l of the rotor and induces pol es  within it.  Wh en the m otor is operating below synchronous speed, there are two  so ur ces  of  torq ue  within it. M ost of the torque is produced by hysteresis. When the   668 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Stator - "6-}  ""GURE 10-35  , ,  II,  , 0,  1-6---..1 , ,  , ,
  ~777 ' ,  Rotor  The construction of a hysteresis motor. The main compon ent of torque in this motor is proponional  to the angle between the rotor and stator magnetic fields.  ma gnetic field of the stator sweeps around the surface of the rotor, the rotor flux  cannot follow it exactly, because the metal of the rotor has a large hysteresis loss.  TIle greater the intrinsic hysteresis loss of the rotor material, the greater the angle  by which the rotor ma gnetic field lags the stator ma gneti
c field. Since the rotor  and stator ma gnetic fields are at different angles, a fmite torque will be produced  in the m otor. In addition, the stator ma gnetic field will produce eddy currents in  the rotor, and these eddy currents produce a ma gnetic field of their ow n, further  increasing the torque on the rotor. TIle greater the relative m otion between the ro­ tor and the stator ma gnetic field, the greater the eddy currents and eddy-current  torques.  Wh en the motor reaches synchronous s
peed, the stator flux ceases to sweep  across the rotor, and the rotor acts like a pennanent ma gnet. Th e induced torque in  the m otor is then proportional to the angle between the rotor and the stator ma g­ netic field, up to a maximum angle set by the hysteresis in the rotor.  TIle torque-speed characteristic of a hysteresis m otor is shown in Figure  10--36. Since the amount of hysteresis within a particular rotor is a function of  only the stator flux density and the material from which it
 is made , the hysteresis  torque of the motor is approximately constant for any speed from zero to n,ync. The  eddy-current torque is roughly proportional to the slip of the m otor. TIlese two  facts taken together account for the shape of the hysteresis m otor's torque-speed  characteristic.  FIGURE  10 -37  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS  669  ""GURE  10 -36  n..  The  torque--speed characteristic  ofa  motor.  A small hysteresis motor with a shaded-pole stator. suitable for runni
ng  an  electric clock. Note the  shaded stator poles.  (Stt'phen  J.  Chapman)  Since the torque  of  a  hy steresis m otor  at  any subsynchronous speed is  greater than  it s maximum synchronous torque, a  hy ste re sis m otor can accelerate  any load that  it  can carry during normal operation.  A very small  hy steresis m otor can  be  bui lt  with shaded-pole stator co n­ struc ti on  to  create a tiny self-starting low-powe r synchronous m o tor.  Such a m o­ tor is show n  in  Fi gure  1
0 -37.  It  is comm only used  as  th e driving m echanism in  electric clocks.  An  electric clock is  th erefore synchronized to  the  line frequen cy  of  th e power syste m,  and  th e resulting clock is just  as  accurate (or  as  inaccurate)  as  th e frequency  of  the power system  to  which  it  is tied.   670 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Stepper Motor s  A stepper nwtor is a special type of synchronous m otor which is designed to ro­ tate a specific number of degrees for every elec
tric pulse received by its control  unit. Typical steps are 7.5 or 15° per pulse. 1llese m otors are used in many control  system s, since the position of a shaft or other piece of ma chinery can be controlled  precisely with them.  A simple stepper motor and its associated control unit are shown in Figure  1 0-3S . To understand the operation of the stepper motor, examine Figure 10-39.  TIlis figure show s a two-pole three-phase stator with a pennanent-magnet rotor. If  a dc voltage is applied 
to phase a of the stator and no voltage is applied to phases  band c, then a torque wi ll be induced in the rotor which causes it to line up with  the stator ma gnetic field Bs, as shown in Figure 10--39b.  Now assume that phase a is turned off and that a negative dc voltage is ap­ plied to phase c. TIle new stator ma gnetic field is rotated 60 ° with respect to the  previous ma gnetic field, and the rotor of the m otor follows it around. By continu­ ing this pattern, it is possible to construct
 a table showing the rotor position as a  function of the voltage applied to the stator of the motor. If the voltage produced  by the control unit changes with each input pulse in the order shown in Table  10-1, then the stepper motor will advance by 60° with each input pulse.  It is easy to build a stepper motor with finer step size by increasing the num­ ber of poles on the m otor. From Equation (4-3 1) the number of me chanical de­ grees corresponding to a given number of electrical degrees i
s  (10- 18)  Since each step in Table 10-1 corresponds to 60 electrical degrees, the number of  m echanical degrees m oved per step decreases with increasing numbers of poles.  For examp le, if the stepper m otor has eight poles, then the m echanical angle of the  mot or's shaft will change by 15° per step.  1lle speed of a stepper motor can be related to the numb er of pulses into its  control unit per unit time by using Equation (10-IS). Equation (10-1S) gives the  m echanical angle of a stepp
er motor as a function of the electrical angle. If both  sides of this equation are differentiated w ith respect to time, then w e have a rela­ tionship between the electrical and me chanical rotational speeds of the motor:  2 (1O-19a) w m = pW~  2 (IO-19b)  "' nm = p n~  Since there are six input pulses per electrical revolution, the relationship between  the speed of the mot or in revo lutions per minute and the number of pulses per  minute become s  I nm = -iP npulses (10-20)  where n pulse< 
is the numb er of pulses per minute.  SING L E-PHA SE A ND SPECI A L-PURP OS E M OTORS 671  b  "  + b  Control "' ( ) Voc unit ,  d B,  +~--~  (a)  1 2 3 4 , 6 7 8 ,  Voc 1---,  Phase voltages. V  ,"1~  number  '. '. "  1 Voc 0 0  '.  2 0 0 - Voc  3 0 Voc 0  4 - Voc 0 0  5 0 0 Voc  6 0 - Voc 0  (b' ( "  FIGU RE 10-38  (a) A simple three-phase stepper motor and its associated control unit. The inputs to the control unit  consist of a de power source and a control signal consisting of a train of p
ulses. (b) A sketch of the  output voltage from the control unit as a series of control pulses are input. (e) A table showing the  output voltage from the control unit as a function of pulse number.  672 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  b  o  B,  0,  " .  b'  ('J (bJ  b c'  0 0  0,  B,  .' ~ O·  b'  (cJ  ""GU R E 10-39  Operation of a stepper motor. (a) A voltage V is applied to phase a of the stator. causing a current to  flow in phase a and producing a stator magnetic field ns. The interacti
on of nR and ns produces a  counterclockwise torque on the rotor. (b) When the rotor lines up with the stator magnetic field. the  net torque falls to zero. (c) A voltage - V is applied to phase c of the stator. causing a current to flow  in phase c and producing a stator magnetic field ns. The interaction of DR and Ds produces a  counterclockwise torque on the rotor. causing the rotor to line up with the new position of the  magnetic field.  •  TIlere are two basic types of stepper m otors, dif
fering only in rotor con­ struction: permanent-magnet l)pe and reluctance l)pe. TIle pennanent-magnet  type of stepper motor has a permanent-magnet rotor, while the reluctance-type  stepper m otor has a ferromagnetic rotor which is not a pennanent mag net. (The  rotor of the reluctance m otor described previously in this section is the reluctance  type.) In general, the pennanent-magnet stepper m otor can produce more torque  SING L E-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 673  TAB L E 10-1  R otor p
osition as a function of voltage in a two -pole stepper motor  Input pulse number  2  3  4  5  6  Phase ,·oltaj!cs  "  b  V 0  0 0  0 V  - V 0  0 0  0 -v  , R otor position  0 0 °  - V 60 °  0 120°  0 1SO °  V 240°  0 3lX1°  than the reluctance Iype, since the permanent-magnel stepper motor has lorque  from both the pennanent rotor ma gnetic field and reluctance effects.  Reluctance-type stepper motors are often built with a four-phase stator  winding instead of the three-phase stator winding de
scribed above. A four-phase  stator winding reduces the steps belween pulses from 60 electrical degrees to  45 electrical degrees. As menlioned earlier, the torque in a reluctance m otor varies  as sin 20, so the reluctance torque between steps will be maximum for an angle of  45°. T herefore, a given reluctance-type stepper m otor can produce m ore torque  with a four-phase stator winding than with a three-phase stator winding.  Equation (10-20) can be generalized to apply to all stepper motors
, regard­ less of the number of phases on their stator windings. In general, if a stator has N  phases, it takes 2N pulses per electrical revolution in thai m otor. 1l1erefore, the re­ lationship between the speed of the m otor in revolutions per minute and the num­ ber of pulses per minute becomes  (10-21)  Stepper m otors are very useful in control and positioning system s because  the compuler doing the controlling can know both the exact speed and position of  the stepper m otor without need
ing feedback infonnation from the shaft of the m o­ tor. For example, if a control system sends 1200 pulses per minute 10 the two-pole  stepper motor shown in Figure 10--38, then the speed of the motor will be exaclly  - 3(2 ;oles}l 200 pulses/min)  = 200 r/rnin  (10-20)  Furthennore, if the initial position of the shaft is know n, then the computer can de­ tennine the exact angle of the rotor shaft at any fulure time by simply counting the  total number of pulses which it has sent to the contro
l unit of the stepper m otor.  674 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Example 10-2. A three-phase permanent-magnet stepper motor required for one  particular application mu st be capable of controlling the position of a shaft in steps of 7.5°,  and it must be capable of running at speeds of up to 300 r/min.  (a) H ow many poles must this motor have?  (b) At what rate must control pulses be ra:eived in the motor's control unit if it is to  be driven at 300 r/min?  Solutioll  (a) In a three-phase st
epper motor, each pulse advances the rotor's position by  60 electrical degrees. This advance mu st correspond to 7.5 ma:hanical degrees.  Solving Equation (10--18) for P yields  '. (60") P =2 0m =2 7.5° = 16 poles  (b) Solving Equation (10--21) for npuhe. yields  npul ... = NPn ..  = (3 phasesX 16 poles)(300 r/min)  = 240 pulsesls  Brushless D C Motors  Conventional dc motors have traditionally been used in applications where dc  power sources are available, such as on aircraft and automobiles.
 H owever, small  de m otors of these types have a number of disadvantages. nle principal disad­ vantage is excessive sparking and brush wear. Small, fast dc motors are too small  to use compen sating windings and interpoles, so armature reaction and L dildt ef­ fects tend to produce sparking on their commutator brushes. In addition, the high  rotational speed of these motors causes increased brush wear and requires regular  maintenance every few thousand hours. I f the m otors mu st work in a l
ow-pressure  environment (such as at high altitudes in an aircraft), brush wear can be so bad  that the brushes require replacement after less than an hour of operation!  In som e applications, the regular maintenance required by the brushes of  these dc m otors ma y be unacceptable. Consider for example a dc m otor in an ar­ tificial heart-regular maintenance would require opening the patient's chest. In  other applications, the sparks at the brushes may create an exp losion danger, or  unaccep
table RF noise. For all of these cases, there is a need for a small, fast dc  motor that is highly reliable and has low noise and long life.  Such m otors have been developed in the last 25 years by combining a small  motor mu ch like a pennanent ma gnetic stepper m otor with a rotor position sensor  and a solid-state electronic sw itching circuit. These motors are called brushless de  nwtors because they run from a dc power source but do not have commutat ors and  brushes. A sketch of a small b
rushless dc m otor is shown in Figure 10-40, and a  photograph of a typical brushless dc m otor is show n in Figure 10-41. Th e rotor is  similar to that of a pennanent ma gnet stepper m otor, except that it is nonsalient. nle  stator can have three or m ore phases (there are four phases in the exmnple show n).  S IN G LE-PHA SE A ND SPECI A L-PURP OS E M O TORS  675  "  +  ~  d'  H,  I ,  Control unit  "'  H,  ~'  ,  ,  d'  d  /1"  "'  Position sensor  input  (a)  r-~-----------,--,_---------L-
--L-- ,  1  ____  1  ,- ___  I  ,  1  ____  1  ,  r---------~---L----------,_--,_---- ,  1  ____  1  (b,  FI GURE  10-40  (a) A simple brushless dc motor and its associated control unit. Th e inputs  to  the control unit consist  of  a dc power source and a signal proportional to the current rotor position. (b)  The  voltages applied  to the stator coils.   676  ELECTRIC M AC HINERY  RJNDAMENTALS  ,,'  (h,  ""GU R E 10-41  (a) Typical brushless dc motors. (b) Exploded view showing the permanent 
magnet rotor and a three­ phase (6-pole) stator.  (Counesy  of  Carson Technologies. Inc.)  TIl e basic  co mp onents of a brushless dc motor are  I. A  rennanent  ma gnet rolor  2.  A stator with a three-. four-, or more phase winding  3. A rotor position sensor  4. An el ec tronic circuit  10  co ntrol the phases  of  the rotor winding  A brushless dc m otor functions  by  energizing one stator co il  at  a time with  a  co nstanl dc vo lt age. When a  co il  is turned on,  it  produces a stat
or ma gne ti c field  B s,  and a lorque is produced on the rotor g iv en by  which lends  10  a li gn the rolor with the stator ma gnelic field. At the time show n  in  Fi gure  1O--40a,  the stalor ma gnelic field B s points to the le ft  while the pennanent  ma gnet rotor ma gnetic field BR points up,  prOO uc in g a  co unt erclockwise lorque on  th e rotor. As a resuli  Ih e rotor wi ll  tum to the left.   SINGLE-PHASE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 677  If coil a remained energized all of the
 time, the rotor w ould turn until the  two ma gnetic fields are aligned, and then it would stop, just like a stepper motor.  Th e key to the operation of a brushless dc m otor is that it includes a position sen­ sor, so that the control circuit will know wh en the rotor is almost aligned with the  stator ma gnetic field. At that time coil a will be turned off and coil b will be turned  on, causing the rotor to again experience a counterclockwise torque, and to con­ tinue rotating. nlis process 
continues indefinitely with the coils turned on in the  order a, b, C, d, - a, - b, -C, - d, etc., so that the m otor turns continuously.  Th e electronics of the control circuit can be used to control both the speed  and direction of the motor. The net effect of this design is a m otor that runs from a  dc power source, with full control over both the speed and the direction of rotation.  Brushless dc m otors are available only in small sizes, up to 20 Wor so, but  they have man y advantages in
 the size range over which they are available. Some  of the major advantages include:  I. Relatively high efficiency.  2. L ong life and high reliability.  3. Little or no maintenance.  4. Very little RF noise compared to a dc m otor with brushes.  5. Very high speeds are possible (greater than 50,000 r/min).  Th e principal disadvantage is that a brushless dc m otor is m ore expensive than a  comparable brush dc m otor.  10.7 SUMMARY  Th e ac motors described in previous chapters required three
-phase power to func­ tion. Since m ost residences and small businesses have only single-phase power  sources, these m otors cannot be used. A series of motors capable of running from  a single-phase power source wa s described in this chapter.  The first m otor described wa s the universal m otor. A universal m otor is a se­ ries dc m otor adapted to run from an ac supply, and its torque-speed characteris­ tic is similar to that of a series dc m otor. The universal m otor has a very high  torqu
e, but its speed regulation is very poor.  Single-phase induction motors have no intrinsic starting torque, but once  they are brought up to speed, their torque-speed characteristics are almost as good  as those of three-phase motors of comparable size. Starting is accomp lished by the  addition of an auxiliary winding with a current wh ose phase angle differs from  that of the main winding or by shading portions of the stator poles.  Th e starting torque of a single-phase induction motor depend
s on the phase  angle between the current in the primary winding and the current in the auxiliary  winding, with maximum torque occurring wh en that angle reaches 90°. Since the  split-phase construction provides only a small phase difference between the main  and auxiliary windings, its starting torque is mode st. Capacitor-start m otors have  678 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  auxiliary windings with an approximately 90° phase shift, so they have large start­ ing torques. Perm anent split-c
apacitor m otors, which have sm aller capacitors,  have starting torques intennediate between those of the split-phase m otor and the  capacitor-start m otor. S haded-pole m otors have a very sm all effective phase shift  and therefore a sm all starting torque.  R eluctance m otors and hysteresis m otors are special-purpose ac m otors  which can operate at synchrono us speed w ithout the rotor field windings required  by synchrono us m otors and which can accelerate up to synchronous speed by  t
hem selves. The se m otors can have either single- or three-phase stators.  S tepper m otors are m otors used to adva nce the position of a shaft or other  m echanical device by a fixed amount each time a control pulse is received. 1lley  are used extensively in control system s for positioning objects.  Brushless dc m otors are similar to stepper m otors with penn anent m agnet  rotors, except that they include a position sensor. 1lle position sensor is used to  switch the energized stator coil
 when ever the rotor is alm ost aligned with it, keep­ ing the rotor rotating a speed set by the control electronics. Brushless dc m otors  are m ore expe nsive than ordinary dc m otors, but require low m aintenance and  have high reliability, long life, and low RF noise. The y are available only in sm all  sizes (20 W and down ).  QUEST ION S  10-1. Wh at changes are necessary in a series dc motor to adapt it for operation from an  ac power source?  10-2. Wh y is the torque-speed characteristic
 of a lUliversal motor on an ac source dif­ ferent from the torque-speed characteristic of the sam e m otor on a dc source?  10-3. Why is a single-phase induction motor lUlable to start itself w ithout special auxil­ iary windings?  10-4. H ow is induced torque developed in a single-phase induction motor (a) according  to the double revolving-field theory and (b) according to the cross-field theory?  10-5. H ow does an auxiliary w inding provide a starting torque for single-phase induc­ tion mot
ors?  10-6. H ow is the current phase shift accomplished in the auxiliary winding of a split­ phase induction motor?  10-7. H ow is the current phase shift accomplished in the auxiliary winding of a  capacitor-start induction motor?  10-8. H ow does the starting torque of a pennanent split-capacitor motor compare to that  of a capacitor-start m otor of the same size?  10-9. H ow can the direction of rotation of a split-phase or capacitor-start induction m o- tor be reversed?  10-10. H ow is star
ting torque produced in a shaded-pole m otor?  10-11. H ow does a reluctance m otor start?  10-12. H ow can a reluctance m otor run at synchronous speed?  10-13. What m echanism s produce the starting torque in a hysteresis m otor?  10-14. What m echanism produces the synchronous torque in a hysteresis motor?  SING LE-PHA SE AND SPEC IAL-PURPOSE MOTORS 679  10-15. Explain the operation of a stepper motor.  10-16. What is the difference between a permanent-magnet type of stepper motor and a  relu
ctance-type stepper motor?  10-17. What is the optimal spacing between phases for a reluctance-type stepper motor?  Why?  10-18. What are the advantages and disadvantages of brush less de motors compared to or­ dinary brush dc motors?  PROBLEMS  lO-1. A 120-V, ~hp, 60-H z, four-pole, split-phase induction motor has the following  impedances:  R I = 1.80n  R2 = 2.50n  X I = 2.40n  X 2 = 2.40n  At a slip of 0.05, the motor's rotational losses are 51 W. The rotational losses may  be assumed constan
t over the normal operating range of the motor. If the slip is  0.05, find the following quantities for this motor:  (a) Input power  (b) Air-gap power  (c) P coov  (d) POOl  (e) "T"md  (j) "",  (g) Overall motor efficiency  (h) Stator power factor  10-2. Repeat Problem 10-1 for a rotor slip of 0.025.  10-3. Suppose that the motor in Problem 10-1 is started and the auxiliary winding fails  open while the rotor is accelerating through 400 r/min. H ow much induced torque  will the motor be able to
 produce on its main winding alone? Assuming that the ro­ tationallosses are still 51 W, will this motor continue accelerating or will it slow  down again? Prove your answer.  10-4. U se MATLA8 to calculate and plot the torque-speed characteristic of the motor in  Problem 10--1, ignoring the starting winding.  10-5. A 220-V, 1.5-hp, SO- H z, two-pole, capacitor-start induction motor has the follow­ ing main-winding impedances:  R I = 1.40n  R2 = 1.50n  X l = 1.90n  X2 = 1.90n  At a slip of 0.05,
 the motor's rotational losses are 291 W. The rotational losses may  be assumed constant over the normal operating range of the motor. Find the fol­ lowing quantities for this motor at 5 percent slip:  (a) Stator ClUTent  (b) Stator power factor  (c) Input power  (d) PA G  (e) P coov  680 ELECTRI C M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  (j) P­ (g) Tind  (h) Tlood  (i) Efficiency  10-6. Find the induced torque in the m otor in Problem 10--5 ifit is operating at 5 percent  slip and its terminal voltage is (
a) 190 V, (b) 208 V, (c) 230 V.  10-7. Wha t type of motor wo uld you select to peIform each of the follow ing jobs? Wh y?  (a) Vac uum cleaner  (b) R efrigerator  (c) Air conditioner compr essor  (d) Air conditioner fan  (e) Va riable-speed sew ing m achine  (j) C lock  (g) Electric drill  10-8. For a particular application, a three-ph ase stepper motor mu st be capable of step­ ping in 10° increm ents. H ow m any po les mu st it have?  10-9. H ow man y pulses per second mu st be supplied to th
e controllUlit of the m otor in  Problem 10-8 to achieve a rotational speed of 600 r/min?  10-10. Co nstruct a table show ing step size versus num ber of poles for three-phase and  four-phase stepper motors.  REFERENCES  I. Fitzgerald. A. E.. and C. K ingsley. Jr. Electric M achinery. N ew Yort: M cGraw- H ill. 1952.  2. N ational E lectrical M anufacturers Association. M otors and Generators. Pu blication N o. M G I- 1993. Washington. D .C.: NEM A. 1993.  3. Veinott. G. C. Fractional and Sulifr
actional H orsepov."er Electric M otors. N ew York:: M cGraw­ H ill. 1970.  4. W erninck:. E . H . (ed.). Electric Motor Handbook.. Lo ndon: M cGraw- H ill. 1978.  APPENDIX  A  THREE-PHASE  CIRCUITS  A lmost all electric power generation and mo st of the power transmission in the  world looay is in the form of three-phase ac circuits. A three-phase ac power  system consists of three-phase generators, transmission lines, and loads. AC  power system s have a great advantage over de system s in tha
t their voltage levels  can be changed with transfonners to reduce transmission losses, as described in  Chapter 2. Three-phase ac power system s have two major advantages over singlc­ phase ac power system s: (I) it is possible to get more power per kilogram ofm ctal  from a three-phase ma chine and (2) the power delivered to a three-phase load is  constant at all times, instead of pulsing as it does in single-phase system s. lluce­ phase system s also mak e the use of induction motors easier b
y allowing them to  start without special auxiliary starting windings.  A.I GENERATION OF THREE-PHASE  VOLTAGES AND CURRENTS  A three-phase generator consists of three single-phase generators, with voltages  equal in ma gnitude but differing in phase angle from the others by l20?E.1.ch of  these three generators could be connected to one of three identical loads by a pair  of wires, and the resulting power system would be as shown in Fig ure A-lc. Such  a system consists of three single-phase ci
rcuits that happen to differ in phase an­ gle by I 20?Th e current flowing to each load can be found from the equation  (A -I)  681  682 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  «)  ""GU R E A- I  VA(t) ",,fi Vsin w/V  VA ",VLOoV  VB(t) '" ,fi V sin (wt _ 120°) V  VB "'VL - 1200V  Vdt) '" ,fi V sin (wt _ 240°) V  V c '" V L _240° V  (.)  (b)  Z Z ",ZL(J  Z Z ",ZL(J  Z Z ",ZL(J  (a) A three-phase generator. consisting of three single-phase sources equal in magnitude and 120°  apart in phase. (b) T
he voltages in each phase of the generator. (c) The three phases of the generator  connected to three identicalloods.  lHREE-PHA SE C IRCU ITS 683  v,  v,  '"  F'IGUREA - l (concluded)  (d) Pltasor dia.gram showing the voltages in each phase.  .... x V , C ,  '\.... Ve  +  F'IGUREA -2  " - z  'N  z  Th e three ci["(;uits connected together with a. common neutral.  Th erefore, the currents flowing in the three phases are  I = V LO ° = iL-(J  A ZL 6  1 = V L-120 ° = iL-120o - (J  B Z L 6  1 = V L-
240 ° =/L-240 o - (J  e Z L 6  (A -2)  (A -3)  (A-4)  It is possible to connect the negati ve ends of these three single-phase gener­ ators and loads together, so that they share a comm on return line (called the neu­ tral). Th e resulting system is shown in Figure A -2; note that now only four wires  are required to supply pow er from the three generators to the three loads.  H ow mu ch current is flowing in the single neutral wire show n in Figure  A -2? Th e return current will be the sum of 
the currents flowing to each individ­ ual load in the power system. This current is given by  684 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  IN = IA + IB + Ie  = /L-O + /L-O - 120 0  + /L-O - 240 0  = / cos (-0) + jf sin (-0)  + I cos (-() - 120°) + jf sin (-() - 120°)  + lcos (-() - 240°) + jlsin (-() - 240 °)  = f[eos (-(}) + cos(-() - 120°) + cos (-(} - 240 °)]  + jf [sin (-0) + sin (-(} - 120°) + sin (-(} - 240°)]  R ecall the elementary trigonom etric identities:  cos (a - m = cos a cos {3 + sin a si
n {3  sin (a - m = sin a cos {3 - cos a sin (3  Applying these trigonometric identities yields  (A-5)  (A-6)  (A -7)  IN= [[cas (-0) + cos (-U) cos 120 0  + sin (-0) sin 120 0  + cos (-0) cos 240°  + sin (-(f) sin 240°]  + j/[sin (-0) + sin (-0) cos 120° - cos (-0) sin 120 0  + sin (-() cos 240 ° - cos (-() sin 240°]  [ 1 0. 1 0.] IN = I cos (-0) -"2 cos (-0) + 2 Sin (-(}) -"2 cos (-(}) - - ,- S in (-(})  +jIsinC- O)_l sinc-O)-0"COS(-O)_ l SillC- O) + 0 cosC-0)] lL 2 2 2 2  A s long as the three
 loads are equal, the return current in the neutral is  zero! A three-phase power system in which the three generators have voltages that  are exactly equal in ma gnitude and 120° different in phase, and in which alJ three  loads are identical, is called a balanced three-phase system. In such a system , the  neutral is actually unnecessary, and we could get by with only three wires instead  of the original six.  PHASE SEQUENCE. Th e phase sequence of a three-phase powe r system is the  order in 
which the voltages in the individual phases peak.1lle three-phase power  system illustrated in Figure A -I is said to have phase sequence abc, since the volt­ ages in the three phases peak in the order a, b, c (see Figure A-I b). TIle phasor di­ agram of a pow er system with an abc phase sequence is show n in Fig ure A-3a.  It is also possible to connect the three phases of a power system so that the  voltages in the phases peak in order the order a, c, b. This type of power system is  said to h
ave phase sequence acb. 1lle phasor diagram of a power system with an  acb phase sequence is shown in Fig ure A -3b.  TIle result derived above is equally valid for both abc and acb phase  sequences. In either case, if the power system is balanced, the current flowing in  the neutral will be O.  lHRE E-PHA SE C IRCU ITS 685  v c  v ,  FIGUREA -3  v,  v ,  v c  v,  (b)  (a) The phase voltages in a power system with an abc phase sequence. (b) The phase voltages in a  power system with an acb phase
 sequence.  A .2 VOLTAGES AND CURRENTS  IN A THREE-PHASE CIRCUIT  A connection of the sort shown in Figure A -2 is called a wye (Y ) connection be­ cause it looks like the letter Y. Another possible connection is the delta (.6.) con­ nection, in which the three generators are connected head to tail. Th e 11 connec­ tion is possible because the sum of the three voltages V A + VB + V c = 0, so that  no short-circuit currents will flow whe n the three sources are connected head to  tail.  Each gene
rator and each load in a three-phase power system may be either  Y- or l1-connected. Any number ofY- and l1-connected generators and loads ma y  be mixed on a power system.  Figure A-4 shows three-phase generators connected in Y and in 11. 1lle volt­ ages and currents in a given phase are called phase quantities, and the voltages be­ tween lines and currents in the lines connected to the generators are called line  quantities. Th e relationship between the line quantities and phase quantities fo
r a  given generator or load depends on the type of connection used for that generator  or load. Th ese relationships will now be explored for each of the Y and 11  connections.  Voltages and Currents in the Wye (Y) Connection  A Y-connected three-phase generator with an abc phase sequence connected to a  resistive load is show n in Figure A -5. Th e phase voltages in this generator are  given by  V = V LO° - .  V ",. = Vo/>L-120°  V en = Vo/>L-240 °  (A-8)  V co  /  686 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJN
DAMENTALS  '. - "+  C'BV~  V~  ,  ).' " ". VM  " '. - b ~) v. , - ,.)  ""GUR E A-4  (a) Y connection. (b);l. connection.  . , - - '.1 •  V  '"  '. -b  ""GUR E A-S  Y-connected generator with a resistive load.  V. '0 \100 ,  ~ ~ ~  '2· '.  R esistive  load  V.  (h)  '.  Voo  '. - - "  Since the load connected to this generator is assumed to be resistive, the  current in each phase of the generator w ill be at the same angle as the voltage.  Th erefore, the current in each phase will be given by  
Ia = J<I>LO °  Ib = J<I>L-120° (A-9)  v •  lHRE E-PHA SE C IRCU ITS 687  FlGU REA -6  Line-to-line and phase (line-to-neutral)  voltages for the Y connection in Figure A -5.  From FigureA -5, it is obvious that the current in any line is the sam e as the  current in the corresponding phase. TIlerefore, for a Y connection,  Y connection I (A-I 0)  llle relationship between line voltage ,md phase voltage is a bit more complex. B y  Kirchhoff's voltage law, the line-to-line voltage V ah is given by
  V ah = Va - V b  = Vo/> LO ° - Vo/>L-120°  = Vo/> - (-~ Vo/> - J V; Yo/»~ =~ Vo/> + J V; Yo/>  - v'3Vo/>(~ + J1)  - v'jV~30°  Th erefore, the relationship between the ma gnitudes of the line-to-line voltage and  the line-to-neutral (phase) voltage in a V-connected generator or load is  Y connection I (A -II)  In addition, the line voltages are shifted 30° with respect to the phase voltages.  A phasor diagram of the line and phase voltages for the Y connection in Figure  A -5 is show n in Figur
e A-6.  N ote that for Y connections with the abc phase sequence such as the one in  Figure A -5, the voltage of a line leads the corresponding phase voltage by 30°.  For Y connections with the acb phase sequence, the voltage of a line lags the cor­ responding phase voltage by 30°, as yo u will be asked to demonstrate in a prob­ lem at the end of the appendix.  688 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  '. " " -A - ""GURE A-7  ~-oonnected generator with a resistive load.  R esistive  Lo ..  Although t
he relationships between line and phase voltages and currents for  the Y connection were derived for the assumption of a unity power factor, they are  in fact valid for any power factor. The assumption of unity-power-factor loads  simply mad e the mathematics slightly easier in this development.  Voltages and Currents in the Delta (d ) Connection  A .6.-connected three-phase generator connected to a resistive load is shown in  Figure A-7. The phase voltages in this generator are given by  V ab =
 V~LO°  V ".. = V~L-1 20°  Y ea = V~L-240°  Because the load is resistive, the phase currents are given by  lab = 14> LO °  1"..=I4>L-120 °  t, = 14> L -240 0  (A-12)  (A- 13)  In the case of the .6. connection, it is obvious that the line-to-line voltage between  any two lines will be the sam e as the vo ltage in the corresponding phase. In a  .6. connection,  .6. connection I (A-14)  1lle relationship between line current and phase current is m ore complex. It can  be found by applying Kirchho
ff's current law at a node of the .6.. App lying Kirch­ hoff's current law to node A yields the equation  la = lab - lea  = 14>LO ° - 14>L-240 °  (  I .0 ) 3 .0 = 14>- -"2/4> +} T I4> ="2 /4> -}TI4>  I. I.  Tab lcA - l  I.  lH REE- PHASE C IRCU ITS 6 89  F IGU R E 2-8  Line and phase currents for the;l. cOlloection  in Figure A -7.  S ummar y of relationships in Y and &. connections  \' connection ;l. connl.>etion  Voltage magnitudes Vu = v'3V. Vu = V.  Current magnitudes it = I. it= 0 /.  abc p
hase sequence \' ... leads \'. by 30° I. lags I ... by 30°  acb phase sequence \' ... lags \'. by 30° I. leads lob by 30°  - 0 /.(': - jk)  - y'3J",L-30°  Th erefore, the relationship between the mag nitudes of the line and phase currents  in a .6.-connected generator or load is  .6. connection I (A -IS)  and the line currents are shifted 30° relative 10 the corresponding phase currents.  N ote that for .6. connections with the abc phase sequence such as the one  shown in Figure A -7, the curren
t of a line lags the corresponding phase current by  30° (sec Figure A -8). For.6. connections with the acb phase sequence, the current  of a line leads the corresponding phase current by 30°.  TIle voltage and current relationships for Y- and .6.-connected sources and  loads are summarized in Table A - I.  690 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ,----y  I ;.'"  ,-L'-, +  Z~ v",,(t)  b --------------~  A.3 POWER RELATIONSHIPS IN  THREE-PHASE CIRCUITS  FlGUREA -9  A balanced Y-connected load.  Figu
re A -9 shows a balanced V-connected load whose phase impedance is  Z ", = Z L (f'. If the three-phase voltages applied to this load are given by  van(t) = V2 V sin wt  Vbn(t) = V2 V sin(wI' - 120°)  vao(t) = y2V sin(wI' - 240°)  then the three-phase currents flow ing in the load are given by  iit) = V'Ll sin(wt - ())  ib(t) = v'2Isin(wt - 120° - ())  ( (t) = v'2I sin(wt - 240° - ())  (A-16)  (A-17)  where I = V IZ. H ow mu ch power is being supplied to this load from the source?  TIle instantan
eous pow er supplied 1.0 one phase of the load is given by the  equation  I p et) = v(t)i(t) I  lllerefore, the instantaneous power supplied to each of the three phases is  PaCt) = van(tKlt) = 2VI sin(wI') sin(wI'- ())  Pb(t) = v",,(t)ib(t) = 2 VI sin(wI' - 120°) sine wt - 120° - ())  pJt) = vao(t)iJt) = 2Vl sin(wt - 240°) sin(wI'- 240 0  - ())  A trigonom etric identity states that  sin a sin (3 = k[cos(a - (3) - cos(a - (3)1  (A- 18)  (A-19)  (A-20)  Applying this identity to Equ ations (A-19)
 yields new expressions for the pow er  in each phase of the load:  lH REE-PHASE C IRCU ITS 69 1  p  I- ____ PhaseA  -·_·-PhaseB  -------. Phase C  T otal power  - " , \ I \ ,'.  ~. I \ "  1\' \I \ ,'  , I. 'i ti. 1\ ~ . ~ /.  " / ~  ; ,  ; ,  , , ,  " I  "  .'  , , , ,  " I \ I \ " , , , , , ,  '\ I \  ./ \,' , I  'i .. , , ,  , ,  I' ,  -\ , ,  \ ,  "  • , \  , , ,  -I :', , , '  , ' ,  "  " , ,  , , , , , ,  I ' ,',  " I  \ I \ : '  , ;  " '  "  • \ I ' / i  , " ,  I ' I \ ,  , ; , ,  ; ,  ; 
,  ; , , , , , , , ,  , , ,  ; ,  ; ,  ; , , , , , , , ,  , , \ , ,  , , , , \ ;  , ;  , ,  " ,  F'IGU R EA - 1O  , ,  " I  , ' , ,  " I  , ,  , ,  " , ,  " , , , , , ,  , , , , ' , ,  \ ' , , , , ; , ,  "  I ,  ;\  "  '; I  " I , , I, , ,  , , , , , ,  '" 8 , 2  Instantaneous power in phases a, b, and c, plus the total power supplied to the load.  PaCt) = V/[COS () - cos(2wl - ())]  P b(t) = V/[COS () - cos(2wl - 240 0  - ())]  p/t) = V/[COS () - cos(2wl - 480 0  - ())]  WI  (A -2I)  TIle total
 power supplied to the entire three-phase load is the sum of the  power supplied to each of the individual phases. T he power supplied by each  phase consists of a constant component plus a pulsing component. H oweve r, the  pulsing components in the three phases cancel each other out since they are 12(?  out of phase with each other, and the final power supplied by the three-phase  power system is constant. T his power is given by the equation:  p,jl) = Plt(t) + Ps(t) + pel,t) = 3Vl cos () (A -
22)  llle instantaneous power in phases a, b, and c are show n as a function of time  in Figure A -IO. N ote that the total power supplied to a balanced three-phase load  is constant at all times. TIle fact that a constant power is supplied by a three-phase  power system is one of its major advantages comp.:1.red to single-phase sources.  Three-Ph ase Pow er Equ ations Involving  Phase Qu antities  T he single-phase power Equations (1-60) to (1-66) apply to each phase ofa Y- or  a-connected thre
e-phase load, so the real, reactive, and apparent powers supp lied  to a balanced three-phase load are given by  692 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  p = 3 V",1 ,/>COS () (A -23)  Q = 3V",I", sin () (A -24)  S =3 V",I", I (A -2S )  p = 3/ ~ Z cos () (A -26)  Q = 3/ ~ Z sin () (A -27)  S = 3/~Z (A -2S )  1lle angle () is again the angle between the voltage and the current in any  phase of the load (it is the same in all phases), and the power factor of the load is  the cosine of the impedance ang
le (). The pow er-triangle relationships apply as well.  Three-Phase Power Equations Involving  Line Quantities  It is also possible to derive expressions for the power in a balanced three-phase  load in tenns of line quantities. This derivation mu st be done separately for Y- and  ~-c onnec ted loads, since the relationships between the line and phase quantities  are different for each type of connection.  For a Y-connected load, the power consum ed by a load is given by  p = 3Vo/>lo/>cos () (A
 -23)  For this type of load, II-= 10/> and Vu = V3V 0/>, so the power consum ed by the  load can also be expressed as  (A -29)  For a l1-connected load, the power consumed by a load is given by  (A -23)  For this type of load, II-= V3/0/> and Va = V 0/>, so the power consum ed by the  load can also be expressed in tenns of line quantities as  P = 3Vu ( ~) cos ()  = V3Vull-cos () (A -29)  lHREE-PHA SE C IRCU ITS 693  This is exactly the sam e equation that was derived for a V-connected load, so 
 Equation (A-29 ) gives the powe r of a balanced three-phase load in tenns of line  quantities regardless of the connection of the load, Th e reactive and apparent  powers of the load in terms of line quantities are  (A-3D)  (A-31)  It is important to realize that the cos () and sin ()terms in Equations (A-29)  and (A-30) are the cosine and sine of the angle between the phase voltage and the  phase current, not the angle between the line-to-line voltage and the line current.  Rem ember that ther
e is a 30 0  phase shift between the line-to-line and phase volt­ age for a Y connection, and between the line and phase current for a .1.. connection,  so it is important not to take the cosine of the angle between the line-to-line volt­ age and line current.  A.4 ANALYSIS OF BALANCED  THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS  If a three-phase power system is balanced, it is possible to determine the voltages,  currents, and powers at various points in the circuit with a per-phase equivalent  circuit, This idea is 
illustrated in Figure A-II. Figure A-II a show s a V-connected  generator supplying power to a V-connected load through a three-phase trans­ mission line.  In such a balanced system, a neutral wire may be inserted with no effect on  the system, since no current flow s in that wire. nlis system with the extra wire in­ serted is shown in Figure A-II b. Also, notice that each of the three phases is iden­ tical except for a 120 0  shift in phase angle. The refore, it is possible to analyze a  circui
t consisting of one phase and the neutral, and the results of that analysis wil I  be valid for the other two phases as w ell if the 120 0  phase shift is included. Such  a per-phase circuit is shown in Figure A-Ilc.  Th ere is one problem associated with this approach, how ever. It requires  that a neutral line be available (at least conceptually) to provide a return path for  current flow from the loads to the generator. nlis is fine for V- connected sources  and loads, but no neutral can be c
onnected to .1..-connected sources and loads.  H ow can .1..-connected sources and loads be included in a power system to  be analyzed? Th e standard approach is to transfonn the impedances by the Y--h.  transfonn of elementary circuit theory. For the special case of balanced loads, the  Y -.1.. transformation states that ad-con nected load consisting of three equal im­ pedances, each of value Z, is totally equivalent to a V-connected load consisting  of three impedances, each of value Z /3 (see
 Figure A -12). This equivalence  m eans that the voltages, currents, and powers supplied to the two loads cannot be  distinguished in any fashion by anything external to the load itself.  694 ELE CT RIC M AC HINERY RJND A MENT ALS  T ransmission line  (a)  T ransmission line  N eutral  ,b,  T ransmission line  •  • 1 - II • I,  +  "-- Z. - " ,  H G UR E A-l1  (a) A Y-connected generator and load. (b) System with neutral insened. (c) Th e per-phase equivalent  circuit.  lH REE-PHASE C IRCU ITS 6
95  ,-------------, ,-----------------,  ~  3  L _____________ -.l L _________________ ~  FIGU R EA - 12  Y-;I. transformation. A Y-connected impedance of 713 n is totally equivalent to a ;I.-connected  impedance of Z n to any circuit connected to the load's terminals.  0.06 0 jO.120  0.06 0 jO.12 n  +  Vc~ '" l20L-240o v"" '" l20LO" 208 V  0.060 jO.120  FlGU R EA - 13  Th e three-phase circuit of Ex ample A - I.  If a.-connected sources or loads include voltage sources, then the ma gni­ tudes o
f the voltage sources mu st be scaled according to Equation (A-II), and the  effect of tile 30° phase shift mu st be included as well.  Exa mpl e A- I. A 208-V three-phase power system is shown in Figure A - 13. It  consists of an ideal 208-V V-connected three-phase generator cOlUlected through a three­ phase transmission line to a V-connected load. The transmission line has an impedance of  0.06 + jO.12 n per phase, and the load has an impedance of 12 + j9 n per phase. For this  simple power sy
stem, find  (a) The magnitude of the line current IL  (b) The magnitude of the load's line and phase voltages V u and V#.  696 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  +  "-' - 0.06 n jO.l2 n  -I,  V. '" 120 L 0° V,,( Z, I 2+fJ n  FlGU R EA -14  Per-phase circuit in Ex amp le A - I.  (e) The real, reactive, and apparent pow ers consruned by the load  (d) The powe r factor of the load  (e) The real, reactive, and apparent pow ers conswn ed by the transmission line  if) The real, reactive, and apparent 
pow ers supplied by the generator  (g) The generator's power factor  Solutioll  Since both the generator and the load on this power system are V-connected, it is very sim­ ple to construct a per-phase equivalent circuit. This circuit is show n in Figure A - 14.  (a) The line current flowing in the per-phase equivalent circuit is given by  v  11' = ,--:;"­"'" Z l ... + Z l ....  120 L O° V  = m(oCi.06;C:;:+-'j"O.'C12"'1l"):o'+~(I"2C;+:Cj"'9mll)  120L O° 120 L O°  = ~~"'- ~~'" 12.06 + j9.12 - IS.1
2L 37.10  = 7.94L -37.lo A  The ma gnitude of the line current is thus 7.94 A.  (b) The phase voltage on the load is the voltage across one phase of the load. This  voltage is the product of the phase impedance and the phase current of the load:  V .L = 1.t.Z#,  = (7.94L -37.lo A X l2 + j9 0 )  = (7.94L -37.1° A X I5L36 .9° 0)  = 119.IL- 0.2° V  Therefore, the ma gnitude of the load's phase voltage is  V .L = 119.1 V  and the magnitude of the load's line voltage is  V u.= V3 V #-=206.3 V  (e) Th
e real pow er consum ed by the load is  P_=3 VV .cos(J  = 3(119.1 V X7 .94 A) cos 36.9°  = 2270 W  lHREE-PHA SE C IRCU ITS 697  The reactive power consumed by the load is  QIood = 3 V.I. sin 0  = 3(119.1 VX7.94 A) sin 36.90  = 1702 var  The apparent power consumed by the load is  Slood = 3VJ.  (d) The load power factor is  = 3(119.1 VX7.94A)  = 2839 VA  PFIood = cos 0 = cos 36.90 = 0.8 lagging  (e) The current in the transmission line is 7 .94L -37.1 A, and the impedance of the  line is 0.06 + j
O.12 n or O.134L63.4° n per phase. Therefore, the real, reac­ tive, and apparent powers consumed in the line are  PliDe = 31iZ cos 0  = 3(7.94 A ? (0.1340) cos 63.4 0  = 11.3 W  Q1ine = 31lZ sin 0  = 3(7.94 A ? (0.1340) sin 63.40  = 22.7 var  S1ine = 31iZ  = 3(7.94A?(0.1340)  = 25.3 VA  (A-26)  (A-27)  (A-28)  (jJ The real and reactive powers supplied by the generator are the swn of the pow­ ers consumed by the line and the load:  P sea = P1iDe + Plood  = I1.3W+2270W =228 1 W  Q 8«1 = Q1ine + QI
ood  = 22.7var + 1702var = 1725var  The apparent power of the generator is the square root of the sum of the squares  of the real and reactive powers:  s = yp2 + Q2 = 2860 VA to" t"" t""  (g) From the power triangle, the power-factor angle 0 is  _ _ IQ8"' _ _ 11725VA R _ 0  08", - tan p - tan 2281 W - 37.1  ." Therefore, the generator's power factor is  PF gen = cos 37.10 = 0.798 lagging  698 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  0.060 p.120  IL 0.06 0 p.12 0  Ven ", 120 L -240° Y V",,'" 120LOoy  V
u ",208 V  V",,'" 120L -120oV '\..... Z~  +  0.06 0 p.12 0  Jo'IGUR E A - IS  Three-phase circuit in Example A-2.  0.060 +jO.12 0  .1 - I" " + •  + + V. '" 120 L 0" - V. v '  "  - - - Jo'IGUR E A - 16  Per-phase circuit in Example A-2.  Exa m ple A-2. Re~at Exampl e A - I for a ~-connected load, with everything else  unchanged.  Solutioll  This power system is show n in FigureA- 15. Since the load on this power system is ~ con­ nected, it mu st first be converted to an equivalent Y form. Th e ph
ase im~dance of the ~­ connected load is 12 + j9 n so the equivalent phase impedance of the corresponding Y  fonn is  z, .  ZY = T = 4+}3n  Th e resulting per-phase equivalent circuit of this system is show n in Figure A - 16.  (a) The line current flow ing in the per-phase equivalent circuit is given by  lHREE-PHA SE C IRC UIT S 699  120L O° V  = "(O".06= +c)"· O".1C:2~1l~):-:+;',;( 4OC+~j 3'Om)  120L O° 120L O° = = 4.06 + j3.12 5 .12L37 .5°  = 23.4L-37.5° A  Th e m agnitude of the line current
 is thus 23.4 A.  (b) Th e phase voltage on the equivalent Y load is the voltage across one phase of  the load. This voltage is the product of the phase impedance and the phase cur­ rent of the load:  V , - I' Z ' .L-.L.L  = (23.4L-37.5° A X4 + j3fl)  = (23.4L-37.5" A X5L 36.9° n ) = 11 7L - 0.6°V  Th e original load was ~ cOlUlected, so the phase voltage of the original load is  V ¢L= V3( 117 V )=203 V  and the m agnitude of the load's line voltage is  Va = V.u, = 203 V  (c) Th e real pow er co
nsum ed by the equivalent Y load (which is the sam e as the  pow er in the actual load) is  P_=3 V.,t.cos(J  = 3(117 V X23 .4 A) cos 36.9°  = 657 1 W  Th e reactive power consum ed by the load is  Q 1Nd = 3V.,t.sin (J  = 3(11 7 V )(23.4 A ) sin 36.9°  = 4928 var  Th e apparent pow er consum ed by the load is  SI"""= 3V.,t.  (d) Th e load pow er factor is  = 3(117 V )(23.4A)  = 82 13 VA  PF_ = cos (J = cos 36.9° = 0.8 lagging  (e) Th e current in the transmi ssion is 23.4L-37.5° A , and the imped
 ance of  the line is 0.06 + jO.12 n or O.134L6 3.4° n per phase. Th erefore, the real, re­ active, and apparent pow ers consruned in the line are  PliDe = 31lZ cos (J  = 3(23.4A)2(O.134 n ) cos 63.4°  = 98.6 W  (A-26)  700 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Qti ... = 3/lZ sin (J  = 3(23.4 A:Y(0.134 f.!) sin 63.4 0  = 197var  Sti ... = 3/lZ  = 3(23.4 A:Y(0.134 f.!)  = 220 VA  (A-27)  (A-28)  (f) The real and reactive powers supplied by the generator are the sums of the pow­ ers consumed by the lin
e and the load:  P800 = P bJte + P_  = 98.6W + 6571 W = 6670W  Q gen = Q lime + QIoad  = 197 var + 4928 VAR = 5125 var  The apparent power of the generator is the square root of the SlUll of the squares  of the real and reactive powers:  S = yp2 + Q2 = 8411 VA  ~ 800 800  (g) From the power triangle, the power-factor angle (J is  _ _ IQ8 ea _ _ 15 125var _ 0  (J800 - tan p - tan 6670 W - 37.6 ,- Therefore, the generator's power factor is  PF seo = cos 37.6° = 0.792 lagging  A.S ONE-LINE DIAGRAMS
  As we have seen in this chapter, a balanced three-phase power system has three  lines connecting each source with each load, one for each of the phases in the  power system. Th e three phases are all similar, with voltages and currents equal in  amplitude and shifted in phase from each other by 120°. Because the three phases  are all basically the same , it is customary to sketch power system s in a simple  fonn with a single line representing all three phases of the real power system.  Th ese
 one-line diagrams provide a compact way to represent the interconnections  of a power system. One-line diagrams typically include all of the major compo­ nents of a power system, such as generators, transformers, transmission lines, and  loads with the transmission Jines represented by a single line. Th e voltages and  types of connections of each generator and load are usually show n on the diagrrun.  A simple power system is show n in Figure A- I 7, together with the corresponding  one-line d
iagram.  A.6 USING THE POWER TRIANGLE  I f the transmission lines in a pow er system can be assumed to have negligible im­ pedance, then an imp ortant simplification is possible in the calculation of three- lHRE E-PHA SE C IRCU ITS 701  Generator Load I Lood2  +  t' +  '~  •  7..,1  ('j  B us I  L",", ( A connected  "-G,  Y connected '"'''''2 Y connected  (bj  FIGU RE 2-17  (a) A simple power system with a V-connected generator. a A-connected load. and a V- connected  load. (b) The corresponding
 one-line diagram.  7-'2  phase currenls and powers. This simplificalion depends on the use of the real and  reactive powers of each load to detennine the currents and power factors at vari­ ous points in the system.  For example, consider the simple power system show n in Figure A -17. If  the transmission line in that power system is assumed to be lossless, the line volt­ age at the generatorwilJ be the same as the line voltage at the loads. If the gener­ ator voltage is specified, then we can
 find the current and power factor at any  point in this power system as follows :  I. Detennine the line voltage at the generator and the loads. Since the transmis­ sion line is assumed to be lossless, these two voltages will be identical.  2. Determine the real and reactive powers of each load on the power system.  W e can use the know n load voltage to perfonn this calculation.  3. Find the total real and reactive powers supplied to all loads "dow nstream"  from the point being examined.  702
 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Bu sA  ,  ,  I"  ~  ,  ,  480 V  three-phase  HGU R E A - IS  The system in Ex ample A-3.  Lo,'  I  Lo,'  2  Delta connected  Z, '" IOL30on  Wye connected  Z, '" 5L -36.87°n  4. Determine the system power factor at that point, using the power-triangle  relationships.  5. U se Equation (A-29) to detennine line currents, or Equation (A-23) to de­ tennine phase currents, at that point.  nlis approach is comm only employed by engineers estimating the currents  and
 power flows at various points on distribution system s within an industrial  plant. Within a single plant, the lengths of transmission Ii nes will be quite short  and their impedances will be relatively small, and so only small errors will occur  if the impedances are neglected. An engineer can treat the line voltage as constant,  and use the power triangle m ethod to quickly calculate the effect of adding a load  on the overall system current and power factor.  Exa mpl e A-3. Figure A - 18 sho
w s a one-line diagram of a sma11480-V industrial  distribution system. Th e pow er system supplies a constant line voltage of 480 V, and the  impedance of the distribution lines is negligible. Load I is a ~-co nnect ed load with a phase  impedance of IOL30 ° n, and load 2 is a V-connected load with a phase impedance of  5L -36.87° n.  (a) Find the overall power factor of the distribution system.  (b) Find the total line current supplied to the distribution system.  Solutioll  Th e lines in this
 system are assumed impedanceless, so there will be no voltage drops  within the system. Since load I is ~ cormected, its phase voltage will be 480 V. Since load  2 is Y connected, its phase voltage will be 4801\13 = 277 V.  Th e phase current in load I is  Therefore, the real and reactive powers of load I are  P I = 3V'I/'1 cos (J  = 3(480 V )(48 A ) cos 30° = 59.9 kW  lHREE-PHA SE C IRC UIT S 703  Q I = 3V.I/.I sin (J  = 3(480 V X 48 A ) sin 30° = 34.6 kvar  Th e phase ClUTent in load 2 is  I~
 = 2~70V = 55.4 A  Th erefore, the real and reactive powe rs of load 2 are  P2 = 3 V.2/~cos (J  = 3(277 V )(55.4 A ) cos( - 36.87°) = 36.8 kW  Q 2 = 3 V~/.2 sin (J  = 3(277 V )(55.4 A ) sin( -36.87°) = -27.6 kvar  (a) Th e total real and reactive pow ers supplied by the distribution system are  P,ot = PI + P2  = 59.9 kW + 36.8 kW = 96.7 kW  Q ,ot = QI + Q 2  = 34.6 kvar - 27 .6 kvar = 7.00 kvar  From the pow er triangle, the effective impedance angle (J is given by  (J = tan-I ~  _ -I 7.00 kvar 
_ 414 0  - tan 96.7 kW - .  Th e system power factor is thus  PF = cos (J = cos(4.14°) = 0.997 lagging  (b) Th e total line current is given by  QUESTIONS  h = ~o-"P-­ V3 VLcos ()  1 - 96.7 kW = 1l7 A  L - V3( 480 V )(0.997)  A-I. What types of cOlUlections are possible for three-phase generators and loads?  A-2. What is m eant by the tenn "balanced" in a balanced three-phase system ?  A-3. What is the relationship between phase and line voltages and currents for a w ye (Y )  cOlUlection?  A-4. 
What is the relationship between phase and line voltages and currents for a delta (.6.)  cOlUlection?  A-5. What is phase sequence?  A-6. Write the equations for real, reactive, and apparent power in three-phase circuits, in  tenns of both line and phase quantities.  A-7. What is a Y-6. transform ?  704 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  PROBL E M S  A- I. TIrree impedances of 4 + j3 n are.6. connected and tied to a three-phase 208-V  power line. Find I., IL' P, Q, S, and the power factor of thi
s load.  A-2. Figure PA - I show s a three-phase power system with two loads. The a-connected  generator is producing a line voltage of 480 V, and the line impedance is 0.09 +  fJ.16 n. Load I is Y connected, with a phase impedance of2.5L36.87° n and load  2 is a connected, with a phase impedance of 5L -200 n.  I" 0.090 jO.l60  - V""",480L-2400Y  • '".1  N  Vah '" 480LO" Y  Vbe ",480L- 1200 V 0.09 n jO.l6 n  0.09 n jO.l6 n  Generator Loodl  fo'IGUR E I'A-1  The system in Problem A-2.  (a) What i
s the line voltage of the two loads?  (b) What is the voltage drop on the transmission lines?  (c) Find the real and reactive powers supplied to each load.  Lood2  Z.t '" 2.5L36.87°n  Z.2'" 5L -20on  (d) Find the real and reactive power losses in the transmission line.  (e) Find the real power, reactive power. and power factor supplied by the generator.  A-3. Figure PA -2 shows a one-line diagram of a simple power system containing a sin­ gle 480-V generator and three loads. Assume that the tran
smission lines in this  power system are lossless, and answer the following questions.  (a) Assrune that Load I is Y cOlUlected. What are the phase voltage and currents in  that load?  (b) Assrune that Load 2 is.6. connected. What are the phase voltage and currents in  that load?  (c) What real, reactive, and apparent power does the generator supply when the  switch is open?  (d) What is the total line current IL when the sw itch is open?  (e) What real, reactive, and apparent power does the gen
erator supply when the  sw itch is closed?  lHREE-PHA SE C IRC UIT S 705  Bus I  I,  - Lood I lOO kW  0.9 PF lagging  480 V 1.0"'2 SO kVA  Y connected O.S PF lagging  SO kW  0.S5 PF leading -1 1.0'" 3 I  FIGURE PA -2  The power system in Problem A -3.  (f) Wh at is the total line current h wh en the switch is closed?  (g) How does the total line current h compar e to the sum of the three individual  currents It + 12 + 13? If they are not equal, why not?  A-4. Prove that the line voltage of a Y -
connected generator with an acb phase sequence  lags the corresponding phase voltage by 30°. Draw a phasor diagram show ing the  phase and line voltages for this generator.  A-5 . Find the m agnitudes and angles of each line and phase voltage and current on the  load show n in Figure PA-3.  " - '«  FIGURE PA -3  The system in Problem A -5.  A-6. Figure PA-4 shows a one-line diagram of a sm all 480-V distribution system in an  industrial plant. An engineer working at the plant w ishes to calculat
e the current that  will be drawn from the pow er utility compan y with and w ithout the capacitor bank  switched into the system. For the purposes of this calculation, the engineer will as­ sum e that the lines in the system have zero imped ance.  (a) If the sw itch show n is open, ftnd the real, reactive, and apparent powe rs in the  system. Find the total current supplied to the distribution system by the utility.  706 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  SOV  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ~  I, ' ,  ""GU R E
 PA -4  The system in Problem A--6.  Lood  I  Lood  2  ~  T  Delta connected  z. ",IOL30o n  Wye connected  z. '" 4L36.87° n  Capacitor  "','  Wy e connected  z. '" 5L -90on  (b) Repeat part (a) with the sw itch closed.  (c) What happened to the total current supplied by the power system when the  switch closed? Why ?  REF E REN C E  I. Alexander. Charles K., and Matthew N. O. Sadiku: Fun dam entals of Electric C ircuits, McGraw­ H ill. 2CXXl.  APPENDIX  B  COIL PITCH  AND  DISTRIBUTED  WINDINGS
  A s mentioned in Chapter 4, the induced voltage in an ac ma chine is sinusoidal  only if the harm onic comp onents of the air-gap flux density are suppressed.  This appendix describes two techniques used by ma chinery designers to suppress  harm onics in ma chines.  B .1 THE EFFECT OF COIL PITCH  ON AC MACHINES  In the simple ac ma chine design of Section 4.4, the output voltages in the stator  coils were sinusoidal because the air-gap flux density distribution was sinusoidal.  If the air-gap 
flux density distribution had not been sinusoidal, then the output  voltages in the stator would not have been sinusoidal either. They would have had  the sam e nonsinusoidal shape as the flux density distribution.  In general, the air-gap flux density distribution in an ac ma chine will not be  sinusoidal. Ma chine designers do their best to pnxluce sinusoidal flux distributions,  but of course no design is ever perfect. llle actual flux distribution will consist of  a fundamental sinusoidal co
mponent plus hann onics. TIlese hann onic component s  of flux will generate hann onic comp onents in the stator's voltages and currents.  Th e hann onic comp onents in the stator voltages and currents are undesir­ able, so techniques have been developed to suppress the unwanted hann onic com­ ponents in the output voltages and currents ofa ma chine. One important technique  to suppress the harm onics is the use offractionnl-pitch windings.  707  708 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  o  o N r-,
  o  fo'IGURE 8-1  s 0 Pp'" 90° mechanical  Il 180° electrical  ~Nl---e!l- s  Th e pole pitch of a four-pole machine is 90 mechanical or 180 electrical degrees.  Th e Pitch of a Co il  Th e pole pitch is the angular distance between two adjacent poles on a ma chine.  TIle pole pitch of a ma chine in mechanical degrees is  I pp=~ 1 (8- 1)  where Pp is the pole pitch in mechan ical degrees and P is the number of poles on  the ma chine. Regardless of the number of poles on the ma chine, a pole pitc
h is  always 180 electrical degrees (see Figure B - 1).  I f the stator coil stretches across the sam e angle as the pole pitch, it is called  afull-pitch coil. If the stator coil stretches across an angle smaller than a pole  pitch, it is called afractional-pitch coil. The pitch of a fractional-pitch coil is of­ ten expressed as a fraction indicating the portion of the pole pitch it spans. For ex­ ample, a 5/6-pitch coil spans five-sixths of the distance between two adjacent  poles. Alternative
ly, the pitch of a fractional-pitch coil in electrical degrees is  given by Equations (B -2):  em  P ~ - x 180 0  P,  (B-2a)  where Om is the me chanical angle covered by the coil in degrees and Pp is the ma ­ chine's pole pitch in m echanical degrees, or  (8 -2b)  CO IL PITCH AND DISTRIBlJfED WINDINGS 709  Air-gap flUl( density:  B (a ):. BM cos (wl- a)  ,-d  Rotor  Air gap  Stator  +-+f-----p  90" P - ~  , - b '., --~CC~e------- R ,  "  .. ccw~'---VoltageiSreallYintothepage. oorroalonlS. . B· 
. h II smce IS negatIVe ere.  FIGURE B-2  A fractional-pitch winding of pitch p. The vector magnetic flux densities and velocities on the sides  of the coil. The velocities are from a frame of reference in which the magnetic field is stationary.  where e", is the me chanical angle covered by the coil in degrees and P is the num­ ber of poles in the ma chine. M ost practical stator coils have a fractional pitch,  since a fractional-pitch winding provides some important benefits which will be  exp
lained later. Windings employing fractional-pitch coils are known as chorded  windings.  The Induced Voltage of a Fractional-Pitch Coil  What effect does fractional pitch have on the output voltage of a coil? To find out,  examine the simple two-pole ma chine with a fractional-pitch winding show n in  Figure 8-2. TIle pole pitch of this ma chine is 180°, and the coil pitch is p. 1lle  voltage induced in this coil by rotating the ma gnetic field can be found in exactly  the same manner as in the 
previous section, by detennining the voltages on each  side of the coil. Th e total voltage will just be the sum of the voltages on the indi­ vidual sides.  710 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  As before, assume that the ma gnitude of the flux density vector B in the air  gap between the rotor and the stator varies sinusoidally with me chanical angle,  while the direction of B is always radially outward. If a is the angle m easured  from the direction of the peak rotor flux density, then the ma 
gnitude of the flux  density vector B at a point around the rotor is given by  B = BM cosa (8-3a)  Since the rotor is itself rotating within the stator at an angular velocity W m , the  ma gnitude of the flux density vector B at any angle a around the stator is given  by  I B - BM cos (wt a ) I  Th e equation for the induced voltage in a wire is  eiD<! = (v x B) -1  where v = velocity of the wire relative to the ma gnetic field  B = ma gnetic flux density vector  1 = length of conductor in the m
a gnetic field  (B-3 b)  (1-45)  lllis equation can only be used in a frame of reference where the ma gnetic field  appears to be stationary. If we "sit on the ma gnetic field" so that the field appears  to be stationary, the sides of the coil will appear to go by at an apparent velocity  vre], and the equation can be applied. Figure 8-2 shows the vector ma gnetic field  and velocities from the point of view of a stationary ma gnetic field and a m oving  wire.  I. Segment abo For segm ent ab of 
the fractional-pitch coil, a = 90° + pl2. As­ suming that B is directed radially outward from the rotor, the angle between  v and B in segm ent ab is 900, while the quantity v x B is in the direction of  I, so  eba = (v x B ) -I  = vBI directed out of the page  - -vBM cos [w,,! -(900 + ~)] I  - -vBt.I cos (w mt - 90° - ~) (B-4)  w here the negative sign com es from the fact that B is really pointing inward  when it was assumed to point outward.  2. Segment be. Th e voltage on segm ent be is zero
, since the vector quantity  v x B is perpendicular to I, so  ecb = (v x B). 1 = 0 (8-5)  CO IL PITCH AND DISTRIBlJfED WINDINGS 711  3. Segment cd. For segment cd, the angle a = 90° - pI2. A ssuming that B is di­ rected radially outward from the rotor, the angle between v and B in segment  cd is 90°, while the quantity v x B is in the direction ofl, so  edc = (v x B)· I  = vBI directed out of the page  = -vBt.! cos (W"I -90° + ~) (8-6)  4. Segment da. TIle voltage on segm ent da is zero, since t
he vector quantity  v x B is perpendicular to I, so  ead = (v x B ) • I = 0 (8-7)  Th erefore, the total voltage on the coil will be  B y trigonometric identities,  cos (W"I -90° - ~) = cos (w mt - 90°) cos ~ + sin (wmt - 90°) sin ~  cos (W"I -90° + ~) = cos (w mf - 90°) cos ~ - sin (w mt - 90°) sin ~  sin (w mf - 90°) = -cos w mf  Th erefore, the total resulting voltage is  eind = VBMI[-cos(wmt - 900 )COS ~ - sin(w"I- 900)Sin~  + cos (wmt - 90°) cos ~ - sin(wmt - 90°) sin ~]  Since 2vB&l is equ
al to <pw, the fmal expression for the voltage in a single turn is  I eind = <pw sin ~ cos w mt I (8-8)  712 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  TIlis is the same value as the voltage in a full-pitch winding except for the  sin pl2 term. It is customary to define this term as the pitch factor kp of the coil.  TIle pitch factor of a coil is given by  CI-k,-~-'-i-n~~"1  In tenns of the pitch factor, the induced voltage on a single-turn coil is  eind = kp<Ptu cos wmt  TIle total voltage in an N-turn f
ractional-pitch coil is thus  eind = Nc kp<Ptu cos w mt  and its peak voltage is  = 27rNckp4>f  TIlerefore, the nns voltage of any phase of this three-phase stator is  2" EA = V2 Nc kp4>f  = V'17rNckp4>f  (8-9)  (8-10)  (8-11)  (8-12)  (8-13)  (8-14)  (8-15)  Note that for a full-pitch coil, p = 180 0  and Equation (8-15) reduces to the  same result as before.  For ma chines with m ore than two poles, Equation (B-9) gives the pitch fac­ tor if the coil pitch p is in electrical degrees. If the co
il pitch is given in me chani­ cal degrees, then the pitch factor can be given by  Harmonic Problems and  Fractional-Pitch Windings  I kp = sin¥1 (8-16)  TIlere is a very good reason for using fractional-pitch windings. It concerns the ef­ fect of the nonsinusoidal flux density distribution in real ma chines. nlis problem  can be understood by examining the ma chine show n in Figure 8-3. This figure  shows a salient-pole synchronous ma chine whose rotor is sweeping across the sta­ tor surface. 8
ecause the reluctance of the ma gnetic field path is much lmverdi­ rectly under the center of the rotor than it is toward the sides (smaller air gap), the  flux is strongly concentrated at that point and the flux density is very high there.  TIle resulting induced voltage in the winding is shown in Figure B-3. Notice that  it is not sinusoidal-it contains man y harmonic frequency components.  B ecause the resulting voltage wavefonn is symmetric about the center of  the rotor flux, no even harmon
ics are present in the phase voltage. H oweve r, all  CO IL PITC H AND DISTRIBlJfED W INDINGS 7 13  N B,  ,,'  181  ,b,  , "  FIGU R E B-3  (a) A ferromagnetic rotor sweeping past a stator conductor. (b) The flux density distribution of the  magnetic field as a function of time at a point on the stator surface. (c) The resulting induced voltage  in the conductor. Note that the voltage is directly proponional to the magnetic flux density at any  given time.  the odd harmonics (third, fifth, seven
th, ninth, etc.) are present in the phase volt­ age to som e extent and need to be dealt with in the design of ac ma chines. In gen­ eral, the higher the number of a given hannonic frequency component, the lower  its ma gnitude in the phase output voltage; so beyond a certain point (above the  ninth harmonic or so) the effects of higher hannonics ma y be ignored.  714 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Wh en the three phases are Y or 6. connected, som e of the hann onics disap­ pear from the out
put of the ma chine as a result of the three-phase connection. T he  third-harmonic component is one of these. If the fundamental voltages in each of  the three phases are given by  ea(t) = EM ] sin wt V  e,,(t) = EM ] sin (wt - 120°)  eJt) = EM ] sin (wI - 240°)  v  V  then the third-hannonic compon ents of voltage will be given by  e,,3(t) = EM) sin 3wl V  eblt) = EM) sin (3wl- 360°)  ec3(t) = EM) sin (3wl- 720°)  V  V  (8 -17a)  (8 -17b)  (8 -17c)  (8 -18a)  (8 -18b)  (8 -18c)  Notice that th
e third-harmonic components of voltage are all identical in each  phase. If the synchronous ma chine is V-connected, then the third-harmonic  voltage beMe en any Mo terminnls will be zero (even though there may be a  large third-hannonic comp onent of voltage in each phase). If the ma chine is  6.-connected, then the three third-hannonic comp onents all add and drive a third­ harmonic current around inside the 6.-wi ndi ng of the ma chine. Since the third­ harmonic voltages are dropped across th
e ma chine's internal impedances, there  is again no significant third-hannonic compon ent of voltage at the tenninals.  This result applies not only to third-harmonic comp onents but also to any  multiple of a third-harmonic component (such as the ninth hann onic). Such spe­ cial harmonic frequencies are called triplen harmon ics and are automatically sup­ pressed in three-phase ma chines.  1lle remaining hann onic frequencies are the fifth, seventh, eleventh, thir­ teenth, etc. Since the stren
gth of the hann onic components of voltage decreases  with increasing frequency, m ost of the actual distortion in the sinusoidal output of  a synchronous ma chine is caused by the fifth and seventh harmonic frequencies,  som etimes called the belt harmonics. If a way could be found to reduce these  comp onents, then the ma chine's output voltage w ould be essentially a pure sinu­ soid at the fundamental frequency (50 or 60 H z).  H ow can som e of the harmonic content of the winding's terminal 
voltage be  eliminated?  One wa y is to design the rotor itself to distribute the flux in an approxi­ mately sinusoidal shape. Although this action will help reduce the hann onic con­ tent of the output voltage, it may not go far enough in that direction. An additional  step that is used is to design the ma chine with fractional-pitch windings.  1lle key to the effect of fractional-pitch windings on the voltage prrxluced in  a ma chine's stator is that the electrical angle of the nth hannonic is
 n times the elec­ trical angle of the fundrunental frequency comp onent. In other words, if a coil spans  150 electrical degrees at its fundamental frequency, it wil I span 300 electrical de­ grees at its second-hannonic frequency, 450 electrical degrees at its third-hannonic  frequency, and so forth. If p represents the electrical angle spanned by the coil at its  CO IL PITCH A ND DISTRIBlJfED WINDING S 715  fundam ental frequency and v is the number of the hann onic being exm nined, then  the
 coil w ill span vp electrical degrees at that harm onic frequency. Th erefore, the  pitch factor of the coil at the hannonic frequency can be expressed as  I kp = sinT I (8-19)  The important consideration here is that the pitch factor of a w inding is different for  each harnw nic frequency. B y a proper choice of coil pitch it is possible to almost  eliminate harm onic frequency com ponents in the output of the m achine. We can  now see how hann onics are suppressed by looking at a simple exa
m ple problem.  Example B-1. A three-phase, two- pole stator has coils w ith a 5/6 pitch. What are  the pitch factors for the harmonics present in this m achine's coils? D oes this pitch help sup­ press the harm onic content of the generated voltage?  Solution  Th e pole pitch in m echanical degrees of this mac hine is  360°  P = --= 180° , P (B-1)  Th erefore, the m echanical pitch angle of these coils is five-sixths of 180°, or 1500 •  From Equ ation (B-2a), the resulting pitch in electrical d
egrees is  p = £1m X 180° = 150° X 180° = 150°  Pp 180 0 (B-2a)  Th e m echanical pitch angle is equal to the electrical pitch angle only because this is a two­ pole m achine. For any other num ber of poles, they wo uld not be the sam e.  Th erefore, the pitch factors for the fundam ental and the higher odd harm onic fre­ quencies (rem em ber, the even hannonics are already gone) are  Fundam ental:  Third harm onic:  Fifth hannonic:  Seventh hannonic:  Ninth harmonic:  150" kp = sin - 2- = 0.966
  k = sin 3(150°) = -0.707 , 2  k = . 5(150°) = 0259 pS1ll 2 .  k = . 7(150°) = 0259 pS1ll 2 .  k = sin 9(150°) = -0.707 , 2  (This is a triplen hannonic not  present in the three-phase output.)  (This is a triplen hannonic not  present in the three-phase output.)  Th e third- and ninth-hannonic compo nents are suppressed only slightly by this coil  pitch, but that is unimportant since they do not appear at the m achine's terminals anyway .  B etwee n the effects of triplen hann onics and the ef
fects of the coil pitch, the third, fifth,  seventh, and ninth hannonics are suppressed relative to the futuiamentalfrequency. Th ere­ fore, employing fractional-pitch w indings w ill drastically reduce the harmonic content of  the m achine's output voltage w hile causing only a sm all decrease in its ftmdam ental  voltage.  716 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  300  200  > 100  ~  ~ > 0 ;; 0.10 0  !  ~ -100  -200  -300  fo'IGURE 8-4  ~-I ,  ~_- Fractional  pitch  \ ....--Full  Y pitch , , ,  0.2
0 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90  Tim e. cycles \  ,  \ , ,  \  \ ,  I  I  I  I  I  1.00  I  I  I  I  The line voltage out of a three-phase generator with full-pitch and fractional-pitch windings.  Although the peak voltage of the fractional-pitch winding is slightly sma ller than that of the full­ pitch winding. its output voltage is much purer.  TIle tenni nal voltage of a synchronous ma chine is shown in Figure 8-4 both  for full-pitch windings and for windings with a pitch p = 150°. N ot
ice that the  fractional-pitch windings produce a large visible improvement in wa veform quality.  It should be noted that there are certain types of higher-frequency hannon­ ics. called tooth or slot hamwn ics. which cannot be suppressed by varying the  pitch of stator coils. The se slot harmonics will be discussed in conjunction with  distributed windings in Section B.2.  8.2 DISTRIBUTED WINDINGS  IN A C MA C HINES  In the previous section. the windings associated with each phase of an ac ma c
hine  w ere implicitly assumed to be concentrated in a single pair of slots on the stator  surface. In fact, the windings associated with each phase are almost always dis­ tributed among several adjacent pairs of slots, because it is simply impossible to  put all the conductors into a single slot.  TIle construction of the stator windings in real ac ma chines is quite compli­ cated. Normal ac ma chine stators consist of several coils in each phase, distributed  in slots around the inner surface 
of the stator. In larger ma chines, each coil is a  preformed unit consisting of a numb er of turns, each turn insulated from the oth­ ers and from the side of the stator itself (see Figure 8-5). Th e voltage in any  CO IL  PITCH A ND  DI S TRIBlJfED  WINDING S  717  FIGURE B-S  A typical preformed stator coil.  (Courtesy  ofGen e ml  Electric Company.)  ,.,  ,b,  FIGURE B-6  (a) An ac machine stator with preformed stator coils.  (Courtesy  of  Westinghouse Electric Company.)  (b) A close-up vie
w  of  the coil ends  on  a stator. N ote that one side  of  the coil will  be  outennosl  in  its  slot and the other side will  be  innermost  in  its slol. Th is shape permits a single standard coil form to  be  used for every slot  on  the stator.  (Courtesy  ofGeneml  Electric Company.)  s in gle turn of w ir e is very sm a ll , and  it  is o nl y  by  pl ac ing m any of  th ese turns in  se ri es  th at reasonable  vo lt ages can  be  produced. 1lle large  num be r of turns is nor­ m a ll 
y physica ll y divided am ong several co il s,  and  th e co il s are placed  in  slots  eq ua ll y spaced along  th e surface of  th e stat or,  as show n  in  Fi g ur e 8 -6 .   718 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Ph ase belt or  ph= =gro~"~P _ _ _ --I  FIGURE 11-7  A simple double-layer full-pitch  distributed winding for a two-pole ac  machine.  TIle spacing in degrees between adjacent slots on a stator is called the slot  pitch r of the stator. The slot pitch can be expressed in either me 
chanical or elec­ trical degrees.  E xcept in very small ma chines, stator coils are normally fonned into  double-layer windings, as shown in Figure 8-7. D ouble-layer windings are usu­ ally easier to manufacture (fewer slots for a given number of coils) and have sim­ pler end connections than single-layer windings. The y are therefore mu ch less ex­ pensive to build.  Figure 8-7 show s a distributed full-pitch winding for a two-pole ma chine.  In this winding, there are four coils associated wi
th each phase. A ll the coil sides  ofa given phase are placed in adjacent slots, and these sides are known as aphase  belt or phase group. Notice that there are six phase belts on this two-pole stator.  In general, there are 3P phase belts on a P -pole stator, P of them in each phase.  Figure 8-8 show s a distributed winding using fractional-pitch coils. Notice  that this winding still has phase belts, but that the phases of coils within an indi­ vidual slot may be mixed. Th e pitch of the coil
s is 5/6 or 150 electrical degrees.  The Breadth or Distribution Factor  Dividing the total required number of turns into separate coils permits m ore effi­ cient use of the inner surface of the stator, and it provides greater structural  strength, since the slots carved in the frame of the stator can be smaller. H ow ever,  the fact that the turns compo sing a given phase lie at different angles m eans that  their voltages will be som ewhat smaller than wo uld otherwise be expected.  CO IL PITC
H AND DISTRIBlJfED WINDINGS 719  Ph ase belt  FIGURE B-8  A double-layer fractional-pitch ac  winding for a lI'.o-pole ac machine.  To illustrate this problem, examine the ma chine show n in Figure 8-9. This  ma chine has a single-layer winding, with the stator winding of each phase (each  phase belt) distributed among three slots spaced 20° apart.  If the central coil of phase a initially has a voltage given by  E a2 = E LOoy  then the voltages in the other two coils in phase a will be  E,,]=EL
-20o y  E,,3= EL20 0y  Th e total voltage in phase a is given by  E" = Ea ] + Ea2 + E,,)  = EL-2 0° + ELO ° + EL2 0°  = E cos (_20°) + jEsin (_20°) + E + E cos 20° + jEsin 20°  = E + 2Ecos 20° = 2.879E  nlis voltage in phase a is not quite what wou ld have been expected if the  coils in a given phase had all been concentrated in the same slot. nlen, the volt­ age Ea wou ld have been equal to 3E instead of2.879E. Th e ratio of the actual volt­ age in a phase of a distributed winding to its expect
ed value in a concentrated  winding with the sam e number of turns is called the breadth factor or distribution  factor of winding. T he distribution factor is defined as  _ V.p actual  kd - V4>expected with no distribution (8-20)  720 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  Phase belt  ""GURE 11-9  A two-pole stator with a single-layer witxling cOI\Sisting of three coils per phase, each separated by 20".  TIle distribution factor for the ma chine in Figure 8 -9 is thus  (B -21)  TIle distribution fa
ctor is a convenient way to summariz e the decrease in voltage  caused by the spatial distribution of the coils in a stator winding.  It can be show n (see R eference I, page 726) that, for a winding with n slots  per phase belt spaced ydegrees apart, the distribution factor is given by  sin (nyf2) k ~ ="'f'2c  d n sin (yf2) (B -22)  N otice that for the previous example with n = 3 and y= 20°, the distribution fac­ tor becomes  sin (ny!2) k - - d - n sin (yf2) - which is the same result as befor
e.  sin[(3)(200)!2]  3 sin(200!2) = 0.960 (B -22)  CO IL PITCH AND DISTRIBlJfED WINDINGS 721  The Generated Voltage Including  Distribution Effects  Th e nn s voltage in a sing le coil of Nc turns and pitch factor kp was previously de­ tennined to be  (8-15)  If a stator phase consists of i coils, each containing Nc turns, then a total of N p =  iNc turns will be present in the phase. Th e voltage present across the phase will  just be the voltage due to N p turns all in the same slot times the 
reduction caused  by the distribution factor, so the total phase voltage will become  (8-23)  Th e pitch factor and the distribution factor of a winding are som etimes combin ed  for ease of use into a sing le winding factor k.,. The winding factor of a stator is  given by  I k. - k,k, I (8-24)  Applying this defmition to the equation for the voltage in a phase yields  I EA ~ V2wNpk.<I>f I (8-25)  Example B-2. A simple two.JXlle, three.phase, Y·connected synchronous machine  stator is used to ma
ke a generator. It has a double-layer coil construction, with four stator  coils per phase distributed as shown in Figure 8-8. Each coil consists of 10 turns. The  windings have an electrical pitch of 150°, as shown. The rotor (and the magnetic field) is  rotating at 3000 rlmin, and the flux per pole in this machine is 0.019 Wb.  (a) What is the slot pitch of this stator in mechanical degrees? In electrical degrees?  (b) H ow many slots do the coils of this stator span?  (c) What is the magnitud
e of the phase voltage of one phase of this machine's  stator?  (d) What is the machine's tenninal voltage?  (e) H ow much suppression does the fractional-pitch winding give for the fifth­ harmonic component of the voltage relative to the decrease in its fundamental  component?  Solutioll  (a) This stator has 6 phase belts with 2 slots per belt, so it has a total of 12 slots.  Since the entire stator spans 360 0 , the slot pitch of this stator is  360" ")' = ---u-= 30°  This is both its electric
al and mechanical pitch, since this is a two-pole machine.  (b) Since there are 12 slots and 2 poles on this stator, there are 6 slots per pole. A  coil pitch of 150 electrical degrees is 150°1180° = 5/6, so the coils must span 5  stator slots.  722 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  (e) The frequency of this machine is  f = n"'p = (3000 r/min)(2 poles) = 50 H  120 120 z  From Equation (8-19), the pitch factor for the fundamental component of the  voltage is  k = sin vP = sin (1)(150°) = 0966  p 2
 2 . (B-19)  Although the windings in a given phase belt are in three slots, the two outer slots  have only one coil each from the phase. Therefore, the winding essentially oc­ cupies two complete slots. The winding distribution factor is  sin (n),12) sin[(2)(300)12]  kd = n sin (),12) = 2 sin (30°12) = 0.966  Therefore, the voltage in a single phase of this stator is  E}, = V2" 7rNpkpkd~f  (B-22)  = V2" 7r(40 tum s)(O.966)(0.966XO.019 WbX50 H z)  = 157 V  (d) This machine's tenninal voltage is 
 VT = v'5E}, = V3"( 157 V ) = 272 V  (e) The pitch factor for the fifth-harmonic component is  k =sinvP _ . (5XI500)_0259  p 2-S1ll 2-' (B-19)  Since the pitch factor of the fundamental component of the voltage was 0.966  and the pitch factor of the fifth-harmonic component of voltage is 0.259, the  fundamental component was decreased 3.4 percent, while the fifth-hannonic  component was decreased 74.1 percent. Therefore, the fifth-hannonic compo­ nent of the voltage is decreased 70.7 percent mor
e than the fundamental com- ponent is.  Tooth or Slot Harmonics  Although distributed windings offer advantages ove r concentrated windings in  terms of stator strength, utilization, and ease of construction, the use of distributed  windings introduces an additional problem into the ma chine's design. Th e pres­ ence of uniform slots around the inside of the stator causes regular variations in  reluctance and flux along the stator's surface. The se regular variations produce  harmoni c component
 s of voltage called tooth or slot harmonics (see Fig ure  B-JO ). Slot harmoni cs occur at frequencies set by the spacing between adjacent  slots and are given by  (B-26)  B  CO IL PITC H AND DISTRIBlJfED W INDINGS 723  FIGU R E B-1O  Stator  with  slots  Flux density variations in the air gap due to the tooth or slot hannonics. The reluctance of each slot  is higher than the reluctance of the metal surface between the slots. so flux densities are lower  directly over the slots.  where volo< = 
number of the hannonic compon ent  S = number of slots on stator  M = an integer  P = number of poles on machine  Th e valueM = 1 yields the lowes t-frequency slot harmonics, which are also the  m ost troublesom e ones.  Since these hann onic comp onents are set by the spacing between adjacent  coil slots, variations in coil pitch and distribution cannot reduce these effects. Re­ gardless ofa coil's pitch, it must begin and end in a slot, and therefore the coil's  spacing is an integral multiple
 of the basic spacing causing slot hann onics in the  first place.  For example, consider a 72-s10t, six-pole ac ma chine stator. In such a ma­ chine, the two lowest and m ost troubles.ome s.tator hannonics are  724 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  = 2(1)(72) + 1 = 23 25 6 '  Th ese hannonics are at 1380 and 1500 Hz in a 6O-Hz ma chine.  Slot harmonics cause several problems in ac machines:  I. They induce harmonics in the generated voltage of ac generators.  2. The interaction of stator and rot
or slot harmonics produces parasitic torques  in induction motors. 1llese torques can seriously affect the shape of the m o­ tor's torque-speed curve.  3. They introduce vibration and noise in the ma chine.  4. They increase core losses by introducing high-frequency comp onents of volt­ ages and currents into the teeth of the stator.  Slot hannonics are especially troublesom e in induction motors, where they  can induce harmonics of the same frequency into the rotor field circuit, further re­ in
forcing their effects on the ma chine's torque.  Two common approaches are taken in reducing slot hannonics. Th ey are  fractional-slot windings and skewed rotor conductors.  Fractional-slot windings involve using a fractional number of slots per rotor  pole. All previous examples of distributed windings have been integral-slot wind­ ings; i.e., they have had 2, 3, 4, or some other integral number of slots per pole.  On the other hand, a fractional-slot stator might be constructed with 2~ slots 
per  pole. TIle offset between adjacent poles provided by fractional-slot windings helps  to reduce both belt and slot harmonics. This approach to reducing hann onics may  be used on any type ofac ma chine. Fractional-slot hann onics are explained in de­ tail in R eferences 1 and 2.  1lle other, mu ch m ore comm on, approach to reducing slot hann onics is  skewing the conductors on the rotor of the ma chine. nlis approach is primarily  used on induction motors. llle conductors on an induction mo
tor rotor are given a  slight twist, so that when one end of a conductor is under one stator slot, the other  end of the coil is under a neighboring slot. This rotor construction is show n in Fig­ ure 8-1 I. Since a single rotor conductor stretches from one coil slot to the next (a  distance corresponding to one full electrical cycle of the lowest slot hannonic fre­ quency), the voltage comp onents due to the slot hannonic variations in flux cancel.  0,3 SUMMARY  In real ma chines, the stator co
ils are often of fractional pitch, meaning that they do  not reach completely from one ma gnetic pole to the next. Makin g the stator wind­ ings fractional-pitch reduces the ma gnitude of the output voltage slightly, but at  the sam e time attenuates the hannonic comp onents of voltage drastically, result­ ing in a much sm oother output voltage from the ma chine. A stator winding using  fractional-pitch coi Is is often cal led a chorded winding.  Certain higher-frequency hannonics, called tooth 
or slot harmonics, cannot  be suppressed with fractional-pitch coils. Th ese harmonics are especially trouble- CO IL  PITCH AND  DISTRIBlJfED  WINDINGS  725  FIGURE  0-11  An  induction  motor  rotor  exhibiting  conductor  skewing.  The  skew  of  the  rotor  conductors  is  just  equal  to  the  distance  between  one  stator  slot  and  the  next  one.  (Courtesy  of  Ma gneTek,  In c.)  som e in induc ti on motors. They can  be  reduced  by  employing fractional-slot  windings or  by  skewin
g  th e rotor co ndu ctors of  an  induc ti on motor.  Real  ac  machine stators do not simply have o ne  co il  for each phase.  In  o r­ der to get reasonable voltages o ut  of  a ma chine, seve ral  coils  mu st  be  used, each  with a large number  of  turns. This fact requires that the windings  be  distributed  over so me  range on  th e stator surface. Distributing the stator windings in a phase  reduces the possible output voltage by the distribution  fa ctor  kd'  but  it  make s  it  p
hysica ll y easier  to  put  m ore windings on the  ma c hin e.  QUESTIONS  B-1.  Why are distributed windings used instead  of  concentrated windings in  ac  machine  stators?  B-2.  (a)  What is the distribution factor  of  a stator winding?  (b)  What is the value  of  the  distribution factor in a concentrated stator winding?  B-3.  What are chorded windings? Why are they used in  an  ac stator winding?  B-4.  What is pitch? What  is  the pitch factor? H ow  are they related to each other?  
B-5.  Why are third-hannonic components  of  voltage not  fOlUld  in three-phase  ac  machine  outputs?  B-6.  What are triplen harmonics?  B-7.  What are slot harmonics? H ow can they be reduced?  B-8.  H ow can the magnetomotive force (and flux) distribution in an ac machine  be  made  more nearly sinusoidal?  PROBLEMS  B-1.  A two-slot three-phase stator armature  is  wOlUld  for two-pole operation.  If  fractional-pitch windings are to  be  used. what is the best possible choice for wind­ in
g pitch  if  it  is  desired to eliminate the fifth-hannonic compo nent  of  voltage?  B-2.  D erive the relationship for the winding distribution factor  kd  in Equation  (B-22).   726 ELECTRI C MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  B-3. A three-phase four-pole synchronous m achine has 96 stator slots. Th e slots contain  a double-layer w inding (two coils per slot) with four turns per coil. Th e coil pitch is  19124.  (a) Find the slot and coil pitch in electrical degrees.  (b) Find the pitch, distribution,
 and winding factors for this ma chine.  (c) H ow w ell w ill this winding suppress third, fifth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh  harmonics? B e sure to consider the effects of both coil pitch and winding distri­ bution in your answer.  B-4. A three-phase four-pole w inding of the double-layer type is to be installed on a 48- slot stator. Th e pitch of the stator windings is 5/6, and there are 10 tlU1lS per coil in  the windings. All coils in each phase are cOIUlected in series, and the three phas
es  are cormected in 6.. Th e flux per pole in the machine is 0.054 Wb , and the speed of  rotation of the ma gnetic field is 1800 r/min.  (a) Wh at is the pitch factor of this winding?  (b) Wh at is the distribution factor of this winding?  (c) Wh at is the frequency of the voltage produced in this w inding?  (d) Wh at are the resulting phase and tenninal voltages of this stator?  B-5. A three-phase, Y-cOIUlected, six-pole synchronous generator has six slots per pole  on its stator w inding. Th
 e winding itself is a chorded (fractional-pitch) double-layer  w inding with eight tlU1lS per coil. Th e distribution factor kd = 0.956, and the pitch  factor kp = 0.98 1. The flux in the generator is 0.02 Wb per pole, and the speed of ro­ tation is 1200 r/min. Wh at is the line voltage produced by this generator at these  conditions?  B-6. A three-phase, Y -cormected, 50-H z, two-pole synchronous m achine has a stator w ith  18 slots. Its coils form a double-layer chorded w inding (two coils p
er slot), and each  coil has 60 turns. Th e pitch of the stator coils is 8/9.  (a) What rotor flux w ould be required to produce a terminal (line-to-line) voltage  of6 kV ?  (b) H ow effective are coils of this pitch at reducing the fifth-hannonic compon ent  of voltage? Th e seventh-hannonic compon ent of voltage?  B-7. What coil pitch could be used to compl etely eliminate the seventh-harmonic com ­ ponent of voltage in ac m achine armature (stator)? What is the minimum numb er of  slots neede
d on an eight-pole winding to exactly achieve this pitch? What w ould this  pitch do to the fifth-harmonic compon ent of voltage?  B-8. A 13.8-kV , V-connected, 60-Hz , 12-pole, three-phase synchronous generator has  180 stator slots w ith a double-layer winding and eight tlU1lS per coil. Th e coil pitch  on the stator is 12 slots. Th e conductors from all phase belts (or groups) in a given  phase are connected in series.  (a) Wh at flux per pole would be required to give a no-load terminal (lin
e) voltage  of 13.8 kV ?  (b) Wh at is this ma chine's winding factor kO'?  REFERENCES  1. Fitzgerald, A . E.. and Charles K ingsley. Electric M achinery. N ew York: M cGraw- Hili, 1952.  2. Liwsc hitz-Garik, M ichael. and C lyde Wh ipple. A lternating-Current Ma chinery. Princeton. N.J.:  Van N ostrand. 1961.  3. W erninck. E. H. (ed.). Electric M otor H andbook.. Lon don: M cGraw- Hill. 1978.  APPENDIX  C  SALIENT-POLE  THEORY OF  SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  T he equivalent circuit for a synchronou
s generator derived in Chapter 5 is in  fact valid only for ma chines built with cylindrical rotors, and not for ma chines  built with salient-pole rotors. Likewise, the expression for the relationship be­ twccn the torque angle 8 and the power supplied by the generator [Equation  (5-20)] is valid only for cylindrical rotors. In Chapter 5, we ignored any effects  due to the saliency of rotors and assumed that the simple cylindrical theory ap­ plied. This assumption is in fact not too bad for ste
ady-state work, but it is quite  poor for examining the transient behavior of generators and m otors.  Th e problem with the simple equivalent circuit of induction motors is that it  ignores the effect of the reluctance torque on the generator. To understand the idea  of reluctance torque, refer to Figure C -l. nlis figure shows a salient-pole rotor  with no windings inside a three-phase stator. I f a stator ma gnetic field is produced  as show n in the figure, it will induce a ma gnetic field i
n the rotor. Since it is much  easier to produce a flux along the axis of the rotor than it is to produce a flux  across the axis, the flux induced in the rotor will line up with the axis of the rotor.  Since there is an angle between the stator ma gnetic field and the rotor ma gnetic  field, a torque will be induced in the rotor which will tend to line up the rotor with  the stator field. Th e ma gnitude of this torque is proportional to the sine of twice  the angle between the two ma gnetic fi
elds (sin 20).  Since the cyli ndrical rotor theory of synchronous ma chines ignores the fact  that it is easier to establish a ma gnetic field in som e directions than in others (i.e.,  ignores the effect of reluctance torques), it is inaccurate when salient-pole rotors  are involved.  727  728 ELECTRIC M AC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  c'  o  b'  o  FIGURE C-l  o  A salient-pole rotor, illustrating the idea of  reluctance torque, A magnetic field is induced in the  rotor by the stator magnetic field, 
and a torque is  pnxluced on the rotor that is proportional to the sine  of twice the angle between the two fields,  CI DEVELOPMENTOFTHE EQUIVALENT  CIRCUIT OF A SALIENT-POLE  SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR  As was the case for the cylindrical rotor theory, there are four elements in the  equivalent circuit of a synchronous generator:  I. Th e internal generated voltage of the generator E),  2. Th e armature reaction of the synchronous generator  3. Th e stator winding's self-inductance  4. Th e stator w
inding's resistance  TIle first, third, and fourth elements are unchanged in the salient-pole theory of  synchronous generators, but the annature-reaction effect mu st be modified to ex­ plain the fact that it is easier to establish a flux in som e directions than in others,  TIlis modification of the armature-reaction effects is accomplished as ex­ plained below , Figure C -2 shows a two-pole salient-pole rotor rotating counter­ clockwise within a two-pole stator, TIle rotor flux of this rotor 
is called G R , and it  points upward, B y the equation for the induced voltage on a m oving conductor in  the presence of a ma gnetic field,  ei!>d = (v x B) • I (1-45)  the voltage in the conductors in the upper part of the stator will be positive out of  the page, and the voltage in the conductors in the lowe r part of the stator will be  into the page, Th e plane of maximum induced voltage will lie directly under the  rotor pole at any given time,  o  o , ,  FIGURE C-2  , , , ,  SA LIENT -PO
LE THE O RY O F S YN C HR O N O U S M AC HIN ES 729  , '" I "A,1nH ,  ,  II,  o  •  c-~_ Pl~ne of max 1..1  -~,  , ,  (b,  , , , , o  o  : Plane of  Ii!:A,1nH ,  B,  o (.,  o  o  , '" I "A,1nH  B,  o  ,  ,  P lane of  lA, max  ~~:  , , ,  , , , o  "'l=~.'(''----f-+- Plane of  ~ Id, InH  o  o  (,'  -=" M agnetomotive  fo=  '3is" Stator  magnetomotive  fo=  o  :J d" Direct axis  component of  magnetomotive  f=.  :J~ .. Quadrature axis  component of  magnetomotive  f=.  Th e effects of annalure rea
ction in a salient-pole synchronous generator. (a) Th e rotor magnetic field  induces a voltage in the stator which peaks in the wires directly under the pole faces. (b) If a lagging  load is connected to the generator. a stator current will flow that peaks at an angle behind E A'  (c) This stator current 1..1 produces a stator magne tomotive force in the machine.  730 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  EA. "'""  Plane of Bs  I •. ~~  • • •  • / 0  B. Plane of  ++--. Hd-'-T'----- ++- IJ.",ox  • 
•  ,d,  , ,  Bs fornonsalient pole,  Bs with ,alient poles  " ?d" -~,  • ?" ..:...J... . ~.  ~J< m.,since  it is easierto  establish nux  alons the di=t  axis.  ""GU R E C-l (concluded)  0  ® • •  • •  •  'A ~  : Plane of  I max I. ,  • • • • ".  •  • •  " ~ ,.,  " .  •  Plane of  I,  ~  0  '\ '.-.  Plane of max IJ  ®  V~ " EA+Ed +E.  (d) The stator magnetomotive force produces a stator flux lis. H owever. the direct-axis component of  magnetomotive force produces more flux per ampere-turn than 
the quadrature-axis component does.  since the reluctance of the direct-axis flux path is lower than the reluctance of the quadrature-axis  flux path. (e) The direct-and quadrature-axis stator fluxes produce armature reaction voltages in the  stator of the machine.  I f a lagging load is now connected to the tenninals of this generator, then a  currefll will flow whose peak is delayed behind the peak voltage. lllis current is  show n in Figure C -2b.  llle stator currefll flow produces a ma gnet
om otive force that lags 900 be­ hind the plane of peak stator current, as show n in Figure C -2c. In the cylindrical  theory, this ma gnetom otive force then produces a stator ma gnetic field B s that  lines up with the stator ma gnetomotive force. H owever, it is actually easier to pro­ duce a ma gnetic field in the direction of the rotor than it is to produce one in the  direction perpendicular to the rotor. T herefore, we will break down the stator  ma gnetom otive force into comp oneflls pa
rallel to and perpendicular to the rotor's  axis. Each of these ma gnetom otive forces produces a ma gnetic field, but more  flux is produced per ampere-turn along the axis than is produced perpendicular (in  quadrature) to the axis.  I  I  I  E,  E,  v,  ----E  •  SA LIENT -PO LE THE ORY OF SYNC HR ONOUS MACHINES 731  FIGURE C-3  The phase voltage of the generator is just the sum of its internal generated  voltage and its armature reaction voltages.  Th e resulting stator ma gnetic field is sho
w n in Figure C -2d, compared to  the field predicted by the cylindrical rotor theory.  N ow, each compon ent of the stator ma gnetic field produces a voltage of its  ow n in the stator winding by annature reaction. Th ese annature-reaction voltages  are show n in Figure C -2e.  Th e total voltage in the stator is thus  (C-l)  where EJ is the direct-axis component of the annature-reaction voltage and Eq is  the quadrature-axis compon ent of annature reaction voltage (see Figure C -3). As  in the
 case of the cylindrical rotor theory, each armature-reaction voltage is di­ rectly proportional to its stator current and delayed 90° behind the stator current.  Th erefore, each armature-reaction voltage can be modeled by  EJ = -jxJIJ  Eq = -jxqIq  and the total stator voltage becomes  Vo/> = E ... - jxJIJ - jxqIq  (C-2)  (C-3)  (C-4)  The annature resistance and self-reactance mu st now be included. Since the  annature self-reactance X ... is independent of the rotor angle, it is nonnally add
ed to  the direct and quadrature annature-reaction reactances to produce the direct syn­ chronous reactance and the quadrature synchronous reactance of the generator:  IXrx,+XAI  IXq - Xq + XA I  (C-5)  (C-6)  732 ELECTRIC MACHINERY RJNDAMENTALS  ""GURE C-4  The phasor diagram of a salient-pole synchronous generator.  o  0'  I,  b  ""GURE C-S  Constructing the phasor diagram with no prior knowledge of 8. E; lies at the same angle as EA. and  E; may be determined exclusively from information at t
he terminals of the generator. Therefore. the  angle 6 may be found. and the current can be divided into d and q components.  TIle annature resistance voltage drop is just the armature resistance times the ar­ mature current IA .  lllerefore, the final expression for the phase voltage of a salient-pole syn­ chronous m otor is  (C -7)  and the resulting phasor diagram is show n in Figure C-4.  N ote that this phasor diagram requires that the annature current be resolved  into comp onents in paral
lel with EA and in quadrature with EA. H oweve r, the an­ gie between EA and IA is lj + (), which is not usually known before the diagram is  constructed. N ormally, only the power-factor angle () is know n in advance.  It is possible to construct the phasor diagram without advance know ledge of  the angle 0, as show n in Figure C -S. TIle solid lines in Figure C -S are the sam e as  the lines show n in Figure C-4, while the dotted lines present the phasor diagram  as though the ma chine had a c
ylindrical rotor with synchronous reactance Xd .  SA LIENT · POLE THE ORY OF SYNC HR ONOUS MACHINES 733  Th e angle 0 ofEA can be found by using infonnation know n at the tenninals  of the generator. N otice that the phasor E;' which is given by  I EA = V4> + RAIA + jXqIA I (C-8)  is collinear with the internal generated voltage EA' Since E; is determined by the  current at the terminals of the generator, the angle {) can be detennined with a  know ledge of the annature current. Once the angle 0
 is know n, the annature cur·  rent can be broken down into direct and quadrature components, and the internal  generated voltage can be detennined.  Example C- 1. A 480-V, 60-H z, d-cOIlllected, four-pole synchronous generator  has a direct-axis reactance of 0.1 n, and a quadrature-axis reactance of 0.075 n. Its anna­ ture resistance may be neglected. At fun load, this generator supplies 1200 A at a power  factor of 0.8 lagging.  (a) Find the internal generated voltage EA of this generator at f
ull load, assruning  that it has a cylindrical rotor of reactance Xd .  (b) Find the internal generated voltage EA of this generator at fun load, assuming it  has a salient-pole rotor.  Solutioll  (a) Since this generator is d-connected, the armature current at fun load is  IA = 12~A = 693 A  The power factor of the current is 0.8 lagging, so the impedance angle () of the  load is  () = cos-l 0.8 = 36.87°  Therefore, the internal generated voltage is  EA = V4> + jXSIA  = 480 L 0° V + j(O.1 nX693
 L -36.87° A)  = 480 L 0° + 69.3 L 53.13° = 524.5 L 6.1° V  N otice that the torque angle 8 is 6.1°.  (b) Asswne that the rotor is salient. To break down the current into direct-and  quadrature-axis components, it is necessary to know the direction of EA. This di­ rection may be detennined from Equation (C-8):  = 480L 0° V + 0 V + j(0JJ75 nX693L -36.87° A)  = 480LO° + 52L53.13° = 513L4.65" V  (C-8)  The direction of EA is 8 = 4.65". The magnitude of the direct-axis component of  ClUTent is thus 
 Id = IA sin ({) + /))  = (693 A) sin (36.87 + 4.65) = 459 A  734 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  and the magnitude of the quadrature-axis component of current is  Iq = IA cos «() + Ii)  = (693 A) cos (36.87 + 4.65) = 519 A  Combining magnitudes and angles yields  Id = 459 L -85.35° A  Iq = 519 L 4.65° A  The resulting internal generated voltage is  EA = Vo/> + RA IA + jXdld + jX,}-q  = 480 L 0° V + 0 V + j(O.1 0)(459 L -85.35" A) + j(0.075 OX519 L 4.65" A )  = 524.3 L 4.65° V  N otice that t
he magnitude O/ EA is not mu ch affected by the salient poles, but the  angle of EA is considerably different with salient poles than it is without salient  poles.  C.2 TORQ U E A ND POWER EQ U ATION S OF  SA LIE NT-POLE M AC HINE  TIle power output of a synchronous generator with a cylindrical rotor as a function  of the torque ang le was given in Chapter 5 as  _3~V.~E-;A,"'_i _" ~S p = - X , (5-20)  TIlis equation assumed that the annature resistance was negligible. Makin g the  same assumptio
n, what is the output power of a salient-pole generator as a func­ tion of torque angle? T o find out, refer to Fig ure C--6. TIle power out of a syn­ chronous generator is the sum of the power due to the direct-axis current and the  power due to the quadrature-axis current:  v~ cos {j  I, ,  90 -' , ,  IA  I,  ""GU R E C-6  , ,  v  •  Determining the power output of a salient-pote synchronous generator. B oth I ~ and I. contribute to  the output power. as shown.  SA LIENT -PO LE THE ORY OF SYNC
 HR ONOUS MACHINES 735  P = Pd+ Pq (C-9)  = 3 V4>ld cos (900- 8) + 3 V ¥q cos 8  = 3V4>ld sin8+ 3 V4> lq cos 8  From Figure C-6, the direct-axis current is given by  _ EA - \j,cos5  ld - X , (C-IO)  and the quadrature-axis current is given by  _ V1> sin 5  lq - X ,  (C-II)  Substituting Equations (C- IO) and (C-ll) into Equation (C -9) yields  ( EA - V1> cos 8) (V1> sin 8) P = 3V1> X; sin 8 + 3V1> Xq cos 8  3V1>E A (I 1) = X sin 5 + 3 vt X - X sin 5 cos 5  , "  Since, sin 8 cos 8 = ~sin 28, this
 expression reduces to  P = 1> Asin5+~ d q sin25 3VE 3V2(X -X)  Xd 2 J<JXq (C-12)  The first tenn of this expression is the sam e as the power in a cylindrical ro­ tor ma chine, and the second tenn is the additional power due to the reluctance  torque in the machine.  Since the induced torque in the generator is given by T iD<! = P.:ODv1 wm , the in­ duced torque in the m otor can be expressed as  (C- 13)  TIle induced torque out of a salient-pole generator as a function of the  torque angle {j 
is plotted in Figure C -7.  PROBLEMS  C- 1. A 4S0-V, 200-kVA, O.S-PF-Iagging, 6O-H z, four-]Xlle, Y-connected synchronous gen­ erator has a direct-axis reactance of 0.25 n, a quadrature-axis reactance ofO.IS n and  an annature resistance of 0.03 n. Friction, windage, and stray losses may be assruned  negligible. The generator's open-circuit characteristic is given by Figure P5-I.  (a) How much field current is required to make Vrequal to 480 V when the gener­ ator is flmning at no load?  (b) Wha
t is the internal generated voltage of this machine when it is operating at  rated conditions? H ow does this value of E,\ compare to that of Problem 5-2b?  736 ELECTR IC MAC HINERY RJNDAMENTALS  f ind> N·m Total torque  Electrical  -~~----'''----~----~-----'~-- angle 0.  90"  ""GU R E C-7  Reluctance  torque  1800 degrees  Plot of torque versus torque angle for a salient-pole synchronous generator. Note the component of  torque due to rotor reluctance.  (c) What fraction of this generator's ful
l-load power is due to the reluctance torque  of the rotor?  C-2. A l4-pole, Y -connected, three-phase, water-turbine-driven generator is rated at 120  M VA, 13.2 kV, 0.8 PF lagging, and 60 H z. Its direct-axis reactance is 0.62 n and its  quadrature-axis reactance is 0.40 n. All rotational losses may be neglected.  (a) What internal generated voltage would be required for this generator to operate  at the rated conditions?  (b) What is the voltage regulation of this generator at the rated condi
tions?  (c) Sketch the power-versus-torque-angle curve for this generator. At what angle 0  is the power of the generator maximum ?  (d) H ow does the maximum power out of this generator compare to the maximum  power available if it were of cylindrical rotor construction?  C-3 . Suppose that a salient-pole machine is to be used as a motor.  (a) Sketch the phasor diagram of a salient-pole synchronous machine used as a  motor.  (b) Write the equations describing the voltages and currents in this m
otor.  (c) Prove that the torque angle obetween E,\ and V. on this motor is given by  C -4. If the machine in Problem C - l is flmning as a motor at the rated conditions, what is  the maximrun torque that can be drawn from its shaft without it slipping poles when  the field current is zero?  Co nstants  Charge of the electron  Permeability of free space  Permittivity of free space  CO D"c rsion factors  Length  F~  Torque  E nergy  Power  M agnetic flux  M agnetic flux density  M agnetizing inte
nsity  APPENDIX  D  TABLES OF  CONSTANTS  AND  CONVERSION  FACTORS  e = - 1.6X to-19 C  tto = 47'1 X 10-7 Him  £0 = 8.854 X 10-11 F/m  I meter (m)  I kilogram (kg)  I newton (N )  I newlon-meter (N • m)  I joule (1)  I watt (W)  I horsepower  I weber (Wb)  I tesla (f)  I ampere ' turn/m  = 3.281 ft  = 39.37 in  = 0.0685 slug  = 2.205 lb mass (Ibm)  = 0.22481b force (lb' n  = 7.233 poundals  = 0.102 kg (force)  = 0.738 pound-feet (lb' ft)  = 0.738 foot-pounds (ft' lb)  = 3.725 X 10-1 horsepower-h
our (hp ' It)  = 2.778 X 10-1 kilowatt-hour (kWh)  = 1.341 X IO-J hp  = 0.7376 ft· lbf Is  = 746W  = ]Oi maxwells (lines)  = ]Wb/m 1  = 10,000 gauss (G)  = 64.5 kilolineslinl  = 0.0254 A • turns/in  = 0.0126 oersted (Oe)  737   oOC p.-.. "que""e, 684, 68~, 689  -..-,  iD<h>cbon ll"DOH'or, 461J.-464  .oymcJ.""""" ll"DOH'or, 267~.Su  abo SJ'DC1ronow gonmtOor  >c machine, 231J.-472  ""'lpitch. 707_716  do machine.<, ~ 681  <le6DO<l 2JO  di,,,ibolod wiDdiDgS. 716-72~  efficiOJlC)'.261  iD<h>cbon mot
or, 380-472. SN abo  [_""moIor  100 ..... 261_262  _tomooive for<:elflux di,,,ibo1ioo,  _m  power _tbw di.uam-262, 263  .~ reguh.ioD, 26J.-264  .oymcJ.ODOOIS !l"DOH,orS, 267_34.'1. Sa  abo SJ'DC1mnow S.,...,....  symcJ.ODOUII """on, 346-379. Su  abo SJ'DC1moow mol" ..  '(II" .... , 237_2J8, ~~~8  von!", 2B, 2~.'!.'!  v()hlIS·ro~OD,26l-261  wiDdiD,l! imulotioo:>, 2'!8-260  >C Olochine ""'orl, 716  >C lDOIor. Sa lnWctioo moIor,  SyncIroDow IOOIor  >c phase ""810 COIIIro!. ] W-H16  >c phase OJIItro
l 177_186  ocb p.-.. "que""e, 684, 68.'1, 689  Ac<:elentiOlO'<IocolontiOll circui~ m  Acro .. _the-liDe .wting, 430, 4]2  Air gap,.'In  Air_SlIP flux deruity di<lributiOll, 707  Air_SlIP line, 284  Air-SlIP_or, M . 397, 408, 661--662  Allor .. ,,, ... Su S}'DChrnDous se,.""'",,,  Amon;,...., windi"l'. 367--371  ~"um1J11, 737  ~·.1a .... 8  Analog po>he ll"DOntioa ciJ<:uiu. 171  Ana]yoi,. Sn abo N oali ..... analyst.  <:wwlati""ly~dc  genontOlll.614-61.'!  diJJe ... ti.Uy ~dc  gmont<n.618-619  _ 
de S .... ""or. 6()6...«)Il  Aoplar oe<:elontioa. 4  Angular position. J  Aoplar velocity, l-4  Apporo .. _r. 4<J-j()  oymcJ.""""" ll"DOH'or. 327  tnmsfonool. ]]8-lJ9  Apporo .. _, rating odvaot"8".  112-113  ~xi ...... tnmsfonoe:r models, 89  Anna, ... , 490 • .'120  Anna,,,,,, Irus, .'124  Anna,,,,,, .. ""ion  do machine.<,~ • .'120  pole foe ... .'120  ool"",.ly exci,ed de geJ.""'or, ~98  _de.-or,~  oymcJ.""""" l!,,,,on'or, 274  AJmatore reoctioa vonge, 276  AJmatore re,si""""" vong. drop, 73
2  AJmatore winding,,-26/, 492-493, ~20  A01 """ .. fonne:r,I09-H6  'ppare1I' power nlilll adv""ge,  H2-H3  di>adv"'''ge, H ~  inler .. li~,m  variable-voltage_ H~  voltay/""""'" rel" iorubips. III  A01 """ .. fonne:r ,taner (indUCIioo  .-or~ 432  Av <Rf-O flux per ,~ .. , 73  Av<Rf-O power, 48.. 49  Balanced thru-p..... "'Y"em<. 69J-700  Balanced Y-<:O<IDOCOed Iood, 690  Base ,pee<l438, ~~3  Belt lwlDOlliCl, 714  Blockod_roIor CODditioo, 390  Blockod_roIor ""or reac1aD::e, 391  Blockod_roIor Ie
", 4.l~  Bre:dh factor, 718.-720  BreakOOw. 'orque, 409. Sa aIu! Pullou,  'orqu.  Breakover voltay (V""~ I~~  Br",b,268  Br",b drop 10< .... ~~, ~93  Br",b kwe ., ~~  Br",b shifting, ~  Br",b voltage <kq>, ~~  Br",be., 489, ~21--,'!2J  Br",bl .. , de !DOlor, 674--(,77  Br",bl .. , exciters, 268-271  Cage iooOC1ioo mo<or, 382  Cage rotQ1, 380, 3g), 417-419  Copability CIlJve, 3 29...J34  Copability di"llf>l'l-329  Copacitive ~ ~I  Copaci!or-Qar', capaci'Q1_JILII !DOlor,  MI),M3  Copacitor-Qar'mot
In, 64~~3  C .. lnt .... ,28  Ownferod pole .. ~20, ~21  Ow). of !be eleC1rolll, 737  Qde,171  a.opper, 186-193  forcedcomm01"ioo, 187, 18S-189  ponllel-<:","""or <:<>m.un"ion  circuits, 191_ 193  series-apaci'or cornmu,,,ion cir<:uiu,  189-191  a.or<Iod ...mding, 491  a.or<Iod...u.dings, 700  Circulatlog """"., cyclocoove:rler,  21~218  Code letter, 4J(), 431  Coercive DI>[lI>01<>DlO1ive force, 27  ~Ipitcb, 707_716  fno::1ioruol_pitcb coil. 709-712  fno::1ioruol_pitcb wiDdi"W', 712-716  barmooi
cpob ...... , 712-716  pitch of o ooil708-700  Commoa "'""'" <£.0), 109  IND EX  Cormnoo voltage (V d, 100  Cormnoo winding, 100  CormnutatiD,l! ouochlnery. SN de  ~  CormnutatiD,l! pole.<fIO'e:rpoI .... ~II  CormnutatiOll  choppe:r circui,., 18S-189  cyclocoovetter,210  defined, 479, 4&'!, 439  ew nW COI1llW1lItioa i.verler, 194  fcreed, 187, US-189, 210  four_loop de oucl1ine, ~90  panllel-<:apOcitor commOO " ioo circui"  191_ 193  .. If-<:Ol1lDllltatiOll iovene:r, I~  =ie.-<:apOcitor commU1ll
'ioo circui"  189-191  CormnutatQ1, 473. 499, ~19, ~21--,'!23  Cormnutat<>1 pi,cb, 492  CormnutatQ1 "[lIBOJI,., 479, 489  Coq>ar:o'or, 202  Coq>e1Wlting wiDdi"W', ~IWlJ  Coq>lex power, ~ I  ~oded de [lOJ>On1Q1  CUDaIlatively compout><lood, 611--t;1~  dilJeTe.otially ~d, 61~19  ~oded de !DOlor, ~73  oqui .. leD1 circuit, ~  Kirchbo/J', voltage law , ~  ... g .... omot ive force, S68-569  oooli ..... aruolysit, HI--,'!73  ,peed coDtrol. ~73  'orqu~ chlInocleru1ioc  (<U111Ulat,vely ~  """"'~ Wh'!70
  'orqu~ chlInocleru1ioc  (differenlially 00I1lJl0Il1><le  """"'~ nO _.,'I71  CoqJu1er ...... = program. Sa  MATI.AB  Condenser, J64  ConWct ance, 12  ConWctor, 490  ConWctor .kewlog, 724, 7~  Conoeque'" pole., 437  Coruta1Jl-frequeJJC)' cyclocoovener, 209  Coruta1Jl_borsepowe:r conoec1iOll, 439  Coruta1Jl-<lU1pII1_power conoec1iOll, 438  Coru ....... 737  Coruta1Jl_torqu. <:O<IDOCIiOll, 438, 439  CorrveniOll faC1<n, 737, Sa aIu! U .. ,.  of ... 1!UJO  -~. '" machioe .. 261  demodJj .... ,~24--.
,'I~  de lOOIor" ~92  i_OIl motors, 39~  modeHD,I!,86  RCL. 261. 662  =-~,  .ingle-pba<e i_OIl !DOIOI"I, 662  ,YnChrODOW ~oen1or, 321!  1nn>fonne:r, 86, 102  ~'"'. '" machioe .. 261_262  demodJj .... ,~~  739  740 INDEX  Core 10 .. _ _ C""'­ demo«n, ~3  inWctioa .-or.<, 3~  Core _form tnmsforme:r, til  Core _Jo... ~ 83  Cou.o'OJvoItlIge-seruing reI.ys, ~81  Cross_field 1boory, 64l-64~  CSlI%-I99  euo..Jati"" ~g, ~  euo..Jati""ly <:<>mJlOlUlded de l"DOH1Or,  611~1~  euo..Jati""ly <:<>mJlOlUlded d
e motor,  ~"  ~"'  <:OIIll1lOII, 100  <:<re-Iou, 83  .1 COIIDOCtiOll, 6&8-M9  excin.ioo, 83  inrush. 140  I>WIll, ~I  Ie><li.og, ~2  magnetiu ion. 81--1l2  ..n...,I09 _ _ phase circuit, ~9  Y <:oaDOCIion. 68~--688  eurr..t u.u.b, )]9-140  eurr..t source invo:r1OJ (CSI). 1~199  eurr..t lnASforlDOr, 68, 14 1_ 142  eurr..t- ~mitilll circuit, ~92  eurr..t- ~mitilll flUeS, ~89  Cyclooor!verto .. , 209-21 8  basic coacoplS, 209-14  circu1atilll <WRJII, 21~218  <X)II .... t_frequom::y,1I:»  forced comm
01"ioo, 210  DtM>Cirwbting <UrrOJI~ 21 4-21~  ~i"'le -f .. quOJ>C)', 11:»  CyHt>drical_lDOIor ouocmn., 247  ~ wiOOings. >67-371  de ...... , ... voltage coruoller  ciJ<:uit, ~&'!  de genenton, ~94-619  ""mub'ively cornp:>Illlded, 611~1~  "'f"",d,~  diff ... "'i.uyc~61~19  oquival ... , ciJ<:uit, ~~, ~96  _lan,y, ~~  prjlDO JOOVer, m  >epar1IIoly excited. ~. Su abo  Sepanoely exciled do:: genentor  series, ti08--filO  shlLll~ 602--6()Ij. Su also ShILll' do::  .--types, ~94  voltage .. guI"'ion. ~
9~  do:: machine, 473_1;]2  >C modlioo., compand, 681  ..,...."'" reacti"", ~  brush .biftilll, ~  brushe.!, ~21....,'!2J  OOIIllDItatiog poIe ... inlOJp:> .... ,  ~" OOIIllDItation. 4~89  OOIIllDIta1Or, 473, ~19, ~21....,'!23  OOIIlJ>O"SIIIilll winding., ~ IW 13  coastn>ction. ~ IW2J  efficiency, ~24  fum _loop mxbillO, 48~-4\1O  froJI-Ie! wit>di,,!!, ~1....j(J2  Il"lIOJaton. SN de go,.,,"'01'1  iMul" ioo, ~21....,'!2J  LJiIdI vohgo, ~  lap wit>di,,!!, 49l-497  Io.<oo.,~~~  moIOI'I. Sa de moton
  poIoIfnme <:oo>1rI><:ti0ll, ~2(h'!21  power _llowdiogom. ~~....,'!26  proI>le,,",,~14  roIlIting loop between curved pole  face., 473-4&'!  ""orlarmature ..,...uuctioo, ~21  ""or coil., 49()....492  ""or (armature) ...mdings, 492-493  torque, ~2, ~ I(h'! 17  voltage, 47~80, ~ I WI6  .... ve winding. 497....j(J1  de machine _tintiOll CIlJ"""  ~36-,'!38  de motor, UJ _,'!94  ~de.-or.,~Tl  COII1JoI and P"'octior> oquipme.t, ~73  OffOCieDCY, ~92-,'!94  "'lui ...... circuit, ~3~....,'!>6  10 ..... 
m-,w3  DIlIg...,; .. tioa curve, Hli-,'!38  motor.otarting circuit!. HW82  PMDC moton, ~~2  J>OP"Iacity, ~34  >epanoely oxciled ..... or, ~JWJ9,  ~~1. SN 000 S_ de~.  _ie. de motor .. ~2--,'!68  • t.rnI de mot"", ~3B-.'!39. SN abo  Shu.tde motor .  loIid_ ... ,e de motor "","roller,  ~8~....,'!92. SN also Sclid_ ..... do::  motor<:Olltroller  .peed .. guI"'ioo (SR~ ~3W3~  .tarting proI>lemslsoJutiOD!l, ~'73--,'!ll2  type" ~3~  Ward _l«>nard 'Y""'" ~83-,'!&,!  de motor .tarting circllib, SlB-.'!8
2  de Ie", oB4-4.l~  dc-to-do:: <:OIIvo:r1ers, 1S6-193. S" aI.!o  a.,.,.,  D<ep-bar rotor, 420-422  DeIt. (.1) conDectioo, ~8--U9  DeIt.-dek. (.1-.l.) OOIIDOcti"", 12J  DeIt._wye (.1_ y) <:O<U>octioo, 121_ 122  Denti,,!!, 134, 441  o..ig. da .. A lDOIor .. 422  o..ig. dass B motors, 422  o..ig. dass C mo«n, 422  o..ig. clas. D lDOIon, 422-423  o..ig. dass F inWctioa motor, 42J  o..ig. clas .... ,421-42J  Develq>ed mod>anicaI power, 397  Develq>ed torquo, 398  DlAC. 1~8  Differenlially 00IIlJ>0Il
1"I0 de 8"DOH'or,  61~19  Differenlially OOIIlpoundood de motor,  ~" D igital pulse genentiOA circuit., 171  Diode, I~J-I~  defillOd, m  fru-wboelins, 186  PN,I54  PNPN , I~I~~  ... itching time, I~  "iger, 1~4  D ;"ct .oyo:bromu ... actance, 73 I  Dj,,,ibuted wit>dioy, 716-72'!  bRodtW distributioo foetor, 718-720  dOl bar!DOllioc .. 722-724  volt"!!,,,721  Dj,,,ibutioo factor, 71 !!-720  Dj,,,ibutioo tnmsforme:r, til, 98  Dj,,,ibutioo tnmsforme:r oamep b ,o, 141  D i""rter re,si"or, 6)], 614  
DooW .. 1:1  Dot COO"".tiOll, 70, 84  Double-<:"!!,, ""or, 4:D-422  Double _laye:r wit>di"!!,,, 718  Double _ .. voh ing_field tbeory, 6]8-642  Doubly excited .!J"I"-'  machine,31S  Duplex lap winding. 496  Duplex NOor winding. 492  Dynamioc " ability Hmit, 3D  Ecc ... tric pol .. , ~20, ~21  Eddy cmrenI !two" 28  Fancby'.b w,31  ferromap>etic <xu, 28  tnmsformor, 86, 102  Eddy~31  Edi.on. 'Thomas A .. 66  EffociellC)'. Sa 000 EDe~ lou  IOC macmn., 261  do:: machine .. ~24  do:: lDOIon, ~W94  il
llh>ctioo motors, 428-430  nominal, 428-429  tnmsforme:r, 102  ElectJic ciJ<:uit, II  ElectJic.l degru .. 490. ~  ElectJic.lloose.!, 261. Su aI.!o Cq>pe:r  b ••  ElectJic.l macbiDO, I  ElectJooic.s circuit 00ard, ~87  E IIOlJ!J< 737  E IIOlJ!Y Jo...  IOC macbine.s, 261_262  bub !two., ~~  copper 10<00 •. SN Cq>pe:r 10< ...  ""'" ...... SN Cae Jo...  do:: machine .. ~24-~m  do:: IDOIOI'I, ~W93  oddy """""'10< .... SN Eddy """".t  b _  ferromap>etic <xu, 26-28  fricoo.. Itwe" 262  hY" leresi. Iou,
 28  illlh>ctioo motor<, 394-396  mocba.oical 10.<00., 262  00-_ roIlItiOlllll Jo..., 262  rotatiooW 10.<00., 39~  .tr>y los .... 262  tnmsfonoon, 102  wit>date Ioose.!, 262  E opisb 'Y'tem of unit, 2. ~3, 737. Su  aI.!o Units of 1D01!UrO  Equalizers, 494. 496, 498  Equalirilll woo"!!,,, 494, 496. 498  Equi ...... circuit  cornp:>Illldod do:: IDOIOI'I, ~  <IlDlIII"'i",,1y ~ de  g .... ""or, 61). 612  do:: genen<or, ~ ~97  do:: lDOIor, ~3WJ6  diffe .... ially OOIIlpow><lod de  go .. ""or, 616  id
eallnn>fonne:r, 73  illlh>ctioo motor,3!8--.J94  per_~. SN Pe:r-pbaoe oquivole'"  circuit  .uJj"'-poIe .yo:/>roIIt>w l"lIOJator,  728-73 4  "pon'ely exci,ed de go .. ""or,  ~  "pon'ely exci,ed de~, ~3l!  .. rie. do:: genen<or, ti09  ..w.. de 8"oo",'or, 603  ..w.. de motor, ~38  'J'~' 8"DOH'or, 1:14-1:19  'J'~' motor, 347  tnmsforme:r, 86-94  Equi ...... field CIlJre.t, ~, ~99  E xcitati ... ""' ...... BJ Ex .................. _ i __ •. 194  """ """"" ,.; • ~J9  """ """"" ........ «8. (51  _1'010
",.2&-32  F ... -<KO...,. I>i",.op<ed dio:Ioe.s. IS.  F •• I,. l21.J26  FerrornaS .... i< mllori ....  delined, 8 ... ..,. _ .. U--2B  ~ __ 21_Z  mopoti...o.c. """,,.lO6O  porroeotQty.21  Fiold emil. llol  H.1d <mil 101 .. 514  F..1d1oM .. loy. 559. 581  H .1d 10M trip. 569  F .. Id ..... ' ...... m  Fioldwiodi .... 26/. 520  FiIRri .. _if ... 0I>IpJ!.171  Firioe;...po. 179. l!1_IM  _05 .... r .. ld,_  Flosboo .... 5(M  FIat~d.61J  ~,  '" ....:hi .... l46--ZO  .... pt> flu.< ....... y diooib.nio
o, 701  Ie..".. 0 . 7l. 79  ~ cimHI. 12-13  _III. 7l. 79  _idalll.27  .. ne.dc_56l  FIo .. <k";'y. 10. 19-11  Flo .. de";'y vector. 247  Flo .. linb, .. ll, T1  Flu _ok""" ~  F<rco. 737  _""""""' ....... lin. 113-169. 210  f<lrm.w<Ulld .. .-or ~ 717  m..1oop ~ dc'-DO. 48j  m..paIo """wound dc ..-.. 495  Fow.poIo iIIo<Ied.p<>1e iD<h>aioo  m,," ... 6;H  Fow.poIo$II"" wiDdi.D,. 243  Fwr'!"'io ........... 0<1 dc _ ... 499  m...,.odn. oow.-dc ___  conIrOlIef.516  F .............. ail. 491. 11)8, 709-
712  F ........... piIdI wi!ldi_&,. m. 712-716  Froctiooal .. ..,. ..........., .. 724  F ....... 518  F lftow .... li.' diode. 1!6  --, illlMctioro -.. 386-J8II. 43&-40  ",_._.326-311 ", __ 373  1nB1annor.1J4  Froq ... ""y.powe. d>ono::t<rilllX.  .104-J05. ll7.119  Froq"''''''''_'_or diogml.  JO'l.110  Frielioo _ .. 262 5Z  mlOPJ·fJea.14  """.Ie, wi!ldi"", 1001 • .'JO:Z  hII-lood "Oa.c_ ~t.ioG. 100  FoIl--piIdI ail. (90. 1011  Full· ..... rr<'\if.rr  ... "' ... ph .... 167_168  _ph_.169--17O  F
 ........... 1IIaJ (roqtoeO<)'. :1).1  F ... d7l.579  G .. "'""'"' (GTO ) tII)'Rroar. 157 60 __ ElKtric.~ ___ .• :/9  6oDOnl."...,.-pol ..... 4411 • .w9  ~-dc • .s<J4-619. Su /JbtJ dc ....... _  ...... ,  i ......... 46Cl-46I  b .... cklDOlOr •• 1-4241  .JII<bronoo •• 267-3<15, SHabo  Sy.:trDnou. II""R""  0. ..... '01 ocb .... 8. l5  GbosI pb .... 126  00_ mocllanis .... )Of  tnpbiclll _11 .... SH JuWy"a  GTO m,n-t. 157  lWf--onve....,;r .. r  .... &Ie~ 163-166  tJ. ... ~ 168-169  H""",,,"c prob
lems. 218-221. 712-116  Ho.ting limiI. )35  Hip ......... uanomia"" Ii . .. 16  Hi~.IocIfoooi<:o...ruor.. ~  Hi~ .oIid-.-<kn-. Sa _ .1ecUooIi",  Hi&fw~p rqioo. oIQ5  Hi~.torq ... pol ..... 4411. 4,;)  HoIdi", """ ... (I ~~ 155  H<n<p<>W .... 737  H""", diogml. 309. III  Hyo&eH!i .. 26  Hyo&eH! io """". n  Hy~io ....,... 26.. XO  Hpocraio -. 2S  H,.-n ..-... 666-669  Ie. 109  [.' ]]0. I~'  Ie.. llO  [ .~ 109  I'R -. Saeq,p. bun  IdcodlrWlO_. 67_76  cin:ui ... 72-16  ."._ 01 .. 01 ...... formor to
, 56  doo COIIYemioo. 70  iJI¥dmoo Ir'USformo'ioa, 71 _72  magnetizatioo CUtVO. 85  _.wI, 71  __ c.ymboI.~  twim ...;o.@  IGBT. [61_162 21»  ........... _oJ.,..,..... ll5  <kfuood.71  ideal Ir'USformer. 71_72  ........ 1 .....,hitIo. 2&S  rotor circo~ ",0<101.)91  Tbov ..... 4111  ~ • ..p . .tS. 49. ~l. 51 __ ,,-'12-33  _ """",. Su ~  !Jduoced YOl~. SN Volt.  InduoctiOll ....... or. <l6()...464  IndlloCtiOIlmoclli .... 2JO.}8()  IndooctiOll_. J8(l.472  odju!I>bIo ...,~-.,.  ....... 448.451  OfF"
"" 380-312.<117-419  cin:ui, _I por_1tn. ~5:z...16O  ...... ~n~466  de t ... ~ (S<l-4H  deep.bor roICJf. (20-422  <k .. !" clawa. 421-423  diOling&iollod re ....... 31t'J  _~ ......... 42n-422  ,..;_........,2  cfficic...,.. '~30  ._ frequon<,'" _. 3116·JU  equiyolc.t cin:ui~ 113-l94  IN DEX 741  bistorical .............. (~211  iO<b:ed Iorque. :l84-JSS. <lOI--IOII  liK~ .• )S."'O  liK "Oltqe..uJ  Io<:to<I-...--. (jj..(~  ~.~  ... ,"";c field, <102  Dl>!"";c.-or M •• r ciKuit.  432-4:14  ...!..,
.;mioot ........ :189. 390  -mod of ~ pole>. 43&-431  ....... ......., ___ • .02-454  _"'too.t' • ......-. '". ___ •. ~  4]),-4]4  pc • .pw.e eqWyoi..- ciKui~ 194  pole clwJsin& 4:16-4)8  _or. 39t\.J98. <1 66  _or limio. 4tS6  _ ... _di ....... J94  po_ """", .• I0-411  P"o\'M ctT<a.4.U-447  "";ap. 464-466  ...uti ... _ cin:ui~ (J4. 435  r<JOor cin:ui, !DOdo1. J9O.J9l  ""or fro","ncy. 387  rotor ", ... Ianc" 44J..414  ,OIor sip. 38(i  ""'" __ ......... _ 4.S1. 4.S1  scponlio&"-coppor lr>acof_.  
,~,  _.cin:uit ..... ___ .·~ m  .illlgle-plwe __ 637-665, Sa  abo 50", ... "" ... iD<h>aioo  -,  >peed <:am>1. 434-444  ...... ,,430-4l4  ..... ,code ......... 30. 431  a, ___ ope«!. Jas. 435-436  ""'fK. :l84-JSS. )91, 401..«JII.  410-411  ~ -".ri.oUc. 401-416  tnn>fonneJ _I. l89-l90  YOl, •• 44.1. 465--166  voLtaso ", .. s. 46S-466  ·oItase· ...... ·f~ po"" ....  ~,  ..... 0<1 ..-. llW50I  bdocWrI __ "'*"'" cimoi<x OJ  bdocWrI...-<Ieoi,1 c_.421-423  tr.t.ctioo ...,." ... i ..... 441-452  lodoct
ioo JOOt<Jr .. tinp. ~  lodoctioo """'" ",""I .. cirouiu.  432-434  t..doct;.. kid" ,;)5  t.mct;..1ood, 5l. 1&4-186  1Dr .... bas, lOS  IDpoo: wiodi"", 66  In.wl .. : ........ J40  1"'_ .......... k trip. :!89  lrutrurDeJl' nnsfortntn. 140-142  JruoJ>tod.g>te bipol .. tnruiotor ( I GBT~  161_ H'i21JYj  ~  oc ...-bi"a 259.260 dc __ (91. 52l-514  _"-;0s. 335. )]6  r<JOor coih. 491  .}'Id>roIows • __ . ll5  l .. orruol rnxbi .. lmpc<to_. 285  Inve._,;"", .,..,.lood trip. ~9  In ....... 193  CIIIft1
Il ......... I9S-I99  .mna[~ ... I9(  PWM .202-209  -ar ... ·i.Y ...... (9)"1JYj  v~ ""'""'. 195. 196. 199-,2Q2  742 IN DEX  bolt II). 7.17  IGlosram (q). 7.l7  lGlovolwll>oon. 371  Kirdobotr', """ ... 1_. 688  Kir"""""', ""hp la~  e<>cnpo .. dod doc moI<Jr. 568  O<I"iv ... ., cu.:.~ ('j'Dcluonow  81'_).216  ""'"v ..... cu.:.~ ('j'Dcluonow  _~ :141  r .. 1d ~nt __ (,~  _~ l:!1  ~_de-,J7  MJIOI"*Iy ""ciood de ........... WI  MJIOI"*/y ""ciood de --. 519  ...... de~. 1iO\I  ....... de_.~  ...... d
e ........... 6W  ..... 'de_.339  Inn .. onn .. pho .... di._lOO  V ......... icJn.OO  Knee. 21  KVL .q ... "i .... 5<. Kirchb:>If',  volt .... ..  L dildt ""~ op. ~-501  l..o"'''1~''' 51  l..o","1 po..... r....".  .~ ,_ ..... 289. 290  .)'IIdII<Inoo. _. :I49.1~  lMni .... -.31  Lop ..;odi .. OW.J....oW/  I.atp po.-."....... JOII....312  Lndi .. _.S2  Lndi .. po.-r-.- .).0:1 . .... _ . , ....... 290  ')_ ""*-. 3S2. J62  l.nIr;op nu.... LJ. 7l. 79. 116  l.nIr;l# n:1IctIR: .. 417  ~1l7  lAN.'. 1,'
0'. 29. 30. 3 I. ~  U .. lrequellC)". 4J8-44.J  U .. q ... titiu. 685  Uno .. de 0'>i0chiDe.:I(;....47  I ..... boo;" "'!u .. .,.".l6-17  ge-.to<. .. 41-42. 44  ""*-.... 19-41.44  ............. ..-.... J7-39. 4l-47  .......... .,...".,.,..,.. __ 239-299  .,...".,.,..,.. ""*-. 351-J.S5  ~_~.I\14 Lo:""""""",, __ J90  Lo:I:ockooor .... 455-451  u., ...... , -.......ioD. 611. 616  Lou.. .s.. Enav lou  Low.po......1octroDic.s .. eli .... 59()....S92  Low .... '" n:]!ioon. 4m  M .,..ti. ci"",i~ 11_21 
 M .,..ti. ca .. 9  M.,..ti. don>aiu.. V  M.,..1ic f>tld. 8-21  bolie Fri""iples. I  .ifm 0I.........up. 32. n  FIIMIoy"' .... 28-32  rri ...... 1Joa. 14  itoioced ........ _. l4-J.'I  ~0I-,,402  .-..pel;" .m.;~ 11_21  ~oJ.8-IO  "" .. i., field. 1J1-246. .s.. _  Roari", ... pic f .. 1d  .impIo loop. 2.JO...ZJ8  "os"·ph_ iD<b:Iioo .-or.  .'"'" 'ync"""""" moIor. :147-350  ~ r .. 1d il""'I)'. 9. 10  MapIic flu. 7.17  MapIic flu do";'y. 9--10. 1~21. 737  MapIic...,...... _ c_.432-434  MapIic .......
. 1 pl-. 502  Mapl;" "" ........ liIy. 9. 21  Mapliulioo ........ 21. 22  de _or •• 53~3!. 545  I.""",,,,,,,,,;., ., ... ri ... 560  ide .. ttonsl"' .... ,. U  illll><!ioo onodIiDe. 46J  illll><!ioo _ .lIl9. J90  .,.-.................,..Vl  ..--.fomw. n 136. J90  lJIYllS.V Inaofunnoo-. 136  2»-V de ............ SCI  MopeIili .. "'1Uq.. 21. m  MopeIili .. .........". 319  MopIoo>oIi .. 'on:. Ie ....... _~  In ... ,,"fti<'6-5()@.. ;'A)9  """'I'"",at"''''"''np. 51WLJ  ~de_or.568  ~1ati .. ly """'po
llDdod de  80" .... ""'. (;11  deon""""". 305. ~. 51W13  dift" ... .,i .. ly~de  80 ........... 616  _I"";. ci""';~ II  ..,... .. ly ......... dc geDOnl<><. 598  ..... d_1 1  Mope....,. .. 'on:. (....t). II  Moi.IrMdormor. III  t.'-al de ........... " '" '75 ...... m  MATI.AO  fiolll_......,.(.~  O>OIor).m  fuing IIlJIe. 111-113  I ..... de _or. 46  ... S .... iccircuil.I6-11  ... S .... i .. 'i". OIl ....... 537...,'138  ripple 10C!<f. 165-166  roIO!l",,,,....k: field. 245....246  .pe«l (ohurl 
de 1JIOI<Jr ~ ~1  ........... 1 cIranc: .. n..ic of .,.-.........  ge ............. 2\Il-299  """",,"",pe«l_ (ill<loctio.  ~. 41S-416. 424-425  """""....,...ed _ (-;.. de  _.,...,.,  1OIqUO....,...ed_( .... de  _). S46-.l-i1  ..... tep"tioo. 106-](17  .011: .... &equoncy nolinp. 1l6-1.18  Mo_ .... nt. S .. tini" of .........  Moch .... col cIop<oo .. 708  M ",hoaicol los-. Ui2. 52!l. ~J  M et .. ("'~ 137  M ethod d .oaseq •• ., pole .. 436-438  M ·file. St. M A11.AB  MUuII_ loooe.s. 262. 525  .,
."... 11 • .s... M~ ... fm:e  ~p .. poa.4O!l  MoowoIdl ....... 6  MoIor onioo. .. n  .....  tn ... 1eso. 674-6n  dc..~. s..-_de_  dor. ..... 1  by ......... 666-669  ioGlClioo. 310-412. St. _  [_"'-_  I ..... de 1IICIIOr. 39--41. 44  .. 11IOl.......,.665-666  .inglo.pIwo.6))  Ii..p.pbuo • .-. ..... 631--665. s..­ t>Ut> SO.&Je-tltI-ioGICIi""  -.-=iol.putpOOO. 665.-667  >IO"ppOf. 6~74  .I}"~" 346-31'9. 5<. abo Sy __  00l ...... 6J4...6J(;  ... ples 1'9 ",ndlo,. 496  M ultiple.o!Olor ... Indlo, .. 
4J8  M ultiple ........ ";r><Ii"lo 500  M ultiple .... ,JodI .... 491  M .... 01 fluJ. 78. 19  _pIm. 1010. 141  ildottiorr ......... 4601-46.5 .,.do __ .173  .............. 1.0.141  Ntpr; .. FOIIp. 214  NEMA""""_n .4]1  NEldAi ....... ,;OI .......  i .. ognoI.lIoDoroo-' Ie nocbi .... 259  i .. ognoI.IIoDoJlO"'<' de moI<Jn. 523  ...... , ... Iotion lif. yo. ",odiOS  ~roIUI •• :zro  NE M A nomio" .ff.:",1IC)"  .tondonls. 429  NE M AS_MGI ·I991/M _,..  4 1fd Gt.,,,,,,,,,,.l :tl9. 524  _& ,  Ntooonl
l'lano .... n. SOWOt __ (N). 737  ___ ...... (N . ... ~ 7)1  __ · ... wof~6  N<>.1ood to!lIionoI -. 262. ~3  ND.1ood ....... .ol ""bs .. W  ND.1ood ..... 4}2-4$4  NomiDoI 011".:",,,,,,. 425-429  Noocircu .............. "FIDe ............  214-215  NorIU .... ",oly'; •. S .. abo ....... Iy ....  -'P""odocl doc """"". 571...,'173  "ponlOly .. doed de , .........  ....."  """" de _. 54)...,'147  ~poIo.26!  ~-poIe _ ..... 247  -.um-pole ......... 26!  NamotlY ._"""'_ m  Namotly operr .......... ~7a.
..,'l7Il  -,  ooc.=  QIun·.I ..... 12. SO  Om<>omi.,._. )01  Obo·~ .. di ......... XIO  Opo...,it .. ~ _m>ric (OCC).  2U _214  Opoo..citco.n 1011  .I}"~' ."""'''''. 23.J  ....... 1 ............ 90-91  Opeo.4 """"".,iOll. 126-129  OpeI."OI)'I ... -<lella .......... ion.  1)()..]Jl  Oulplll "OIlodios. 66  Ow«oonpoo-. 61 3  Owrbe","", d windinp. 1l:!. 136  0-_'" 0-.... ,"_ ..... ,,,..."  o-..~ trip. ~19  Pw:ollol .,.......,.. of .. ..-..­ "'-'" odvulO,U. lOO-lOl  ~. po'I'"<f .h.-rUli .....  311.319
  , .... toton d oomo Ii .... 112-J18  inf,DiIO 100 .. J08...J 12  lars.P"'""'rsySlOlW, lO8-312  panlleling <>JDdj,ions, JOI--J03  Slep-by->'ep procew.., lO3-J04  symcJ.rucq>e, JOJ--J()ol  _~gbt-bulb metbo<l 302, JOJ  Parallel-ap.dtor <:OIIllIUI,,,,joo circui~  191_ 193  Peal illvon>e vohg. (PlY), I~  P=e-..;o of rippl., 163  Per ........ , spH'-<:,.,acitor moton,  "" M' Per ........ ,_mapIO, de (PMOC ).-or,  ~~9-j62  Per ........ ,_mapIO, Slepper motor,  ~~;  Per .... bility  ferromagnetic ... 
,ori.ls, 21  fne spac., 10, 737  mapIOtic, 9,21  rei",;"", 10  ... tsof ......... , to  Per ... """", 12  Permittivity of fne space, 737  Per_phase .q.;vole'" circui,  balao::ed _p.. .. sySlOlW.  693,694  iDdoction moIor, 394  symcJ.ODOOIS ll"DOH'or, !l8-!l9  symcJ.ODOUII """or, 348  Per_omit system of .... ......"..,..,  ';D,I;le-phase tnmsforme:r, 94  _pbaoetnmsfonoor,12l-124  Phasebek,718  Phasegroop,718  Ph ... q.aotitie.!l, 6&l  Phase .. qoeoce, 6&4, 6&'!  Pbasor diagnm  ..tienl_pole ,ynd>r
omo.  gonontor, 732  .ymcJ.OGOWi geDmlior, !l9-280  symcJ.ODOOIS motor, 349  tnmsfonoor,IOO-101  Pilot .xciler, 271  Pitch foetor, 491, 712  Pitch of. ooil, 708-700  PlY, 154  Plex (armature windiog.). 492  PloW"l,41O  PMOC motar, ~~9-j62  PNPN diode, I~m  Pol. dwipD,I;, 436-438  PoI.faee,~18  PoI.piece .. ~18  Pol. pitch, 701!  PoI.oboe.,~18  I'ooition """", 6/7  I'ooitiv.groop, 21 4  Pot •• tiol tnrufor ... r, 68, 141  _r,7--11  oir gap, 3~, 397. 4()Ij  _"', 49-j(]. Su aIu>  A"...._  <:<JqI1ex
, ~ I  <le6DOd, 7  <levolopod mocbankol, 397  eq."'ion. 7  iDdoction motor, 396-.198. 466  reactiv.,49  reol,43  ..tienl_pole macbiDe, 734-73~  'ymcJ.ODOWlll"DOH'or, 280-283  _pbaoe circuits, fi9O-fi93  ."ts of ........ , 7, 737  _rdio<le.!, 1~J-I54  _r.lectronic., I~W29  ~1~J-162  cyclocon_ .... ~18. Su aIu>  Cyclocollvon ....  de_to-<Ic power conroI, 186-193.  Su abo Cl>q>per  DIAC, I~8  diode, 1~3_ 154  010 tbyJUtor, I S7  hormonic poblem.!, 2U _221  IOBT,161 _ 162  in_oro. 193--10}  PNPN dio
de, I~m  power tnmsUtor, 160  powerlsJ-d coonparUoru, 162  I"lsecircoit.,111_ ln  I"Ise .yr>chnJDizatioo, In  rectifier circuits. 163_ 170. Su aI>o  Roctifio:r circuits  rectifier_i""" ... r. 193--109. Su aoo  ~". SCR 1~~_ lS7  TRIAC, 1~8-1~9  voltay voriatioo (II<: pbaoe coruol),  In_ l86  P<>wer factor, ~2  .yr>chrnnow g""""or, 328  .yr>chrnnow ImIor, 360-J63  P<>wer ~mits, 327  P<>werOll',71  P<>wer tnmsfor ... "" 6/  P<>wer tnmsis'or ( PTR~ 160  P<>wer triangle, ~I -.B. 700-703  P<>wer_foeto
r correc:tiOll, 360-.J63  P<>wer_no... diogom, 262  "" g."""or, 262, 263, 280-Z81. ~26  ""motor, 263, ~26  .ingle_pbose induoctioo motor, 660  J>r.for ... d ",It or <:Oils, 716. 717  Pri.....,. windi"l, 66  Prime IDOVOJ  de ll"DOH'or, m  .yr>chrnnow g""""or, 304, JO~  .yr>chrnnow ImIor. 367  Prime-mover P"'""'r limit, 331  Progro ... "" lap ...mding, 4~  Progro ... "" rotor ...mding, 493  Progro ... "" .... ve .. inding, ~I  Progro ... "" windi.S, 492  Protoction cir<:oit .. ctiOll, ~89  P1R,I60
  Pollou, 'orque  induction motor, 41(]...413  .yr>chrnnow motor, 3~1  Polo. circuits, 171_ ln  Polo • • yr>clmniu ion, In  Pol_width 1IlOWhtti0ll, 202  Pol_width 1IlOWhtti0ll (indooctior>  motor,~ 444--447  Pol_width 1IlOWhtti0ll (PWM )  i""""',",202-209  Posh bot'OIl.wi,d>e., ~78. S79  Posho"", 'orq •• , 460. 461  PWM drive (indoclion 1OOI0IlI~ 444--447  PWM illvonon, 202-209  R"'ing.  induction motor, 464-466  .yr>chrnnow g""""OII, 326-J36.  Su abo SyAClrODOUS  l"oontor rating •  .yr>chrnnow 
ImIor, 372-373  tnrufor ... r, 134-139  RQ., 261. 662  ,.- direct .yr>chrnnolU, 731  induction motors, 4.17. 4~8  leak"8",417  magnetizing, 389  qua<htic.yr>chronoIU. 731  INDE X 743  NO or,391  ,ubtnmsie"',3l'!  ,YnChrODOUS. 276. 28~. 286  tnnoienl, 32~  Reoctive power, 49  Reocti"" power _voltay cbaracleristic,  ~  Real p<>Wer, 48  Real tnMformor, 76-36  """"""ion of, '0 ide.l1nn>fo:r, 8.'!  """,_to.. <:mreJII, 83  """"'" ",,;ado! COII"".tiO<l, 84-8.'!  .XCitatiOll CIlJ"'.', 83  bystere.oi. CI
lJ"", n  .... goe1i .. 'ion <OrreJI~ 81--32  vol,"8" ratio, 7Il--110  Rectifier circuits, 163_ 170  defiDOd, 163  fiboriD,l; rectifio:r output. 170, 171  f.U_w"".nctiC .. r,I6/_ 16I!  bolf_ .... v.rectifier, 163_ 166  ",ctiCIOJ_illvono:r, 193  SCR, 1~~I56  ~pbaoe f.U_w .v. noetiC .. r,  170-171  ~pbaoe bolf_ ....... rectifier,  169-170  Rectifier_i""" ... r, 193--109. Su abo  Refo:rnd re"Slane. and ",actaDc., 393  Refo:ning, 73  RegmontiOll, ~!4  Rel"ive po:r .... bility, 10  ReIOXlltioo OIciUat
or, 17l_ ln  Reluctar>c., 12, 13  Reluctaoc. 1OOI0Ill, 66~  Reluctar>c.,orque, 66.'!  Reluctaoce-'ype ""opper mot"'", 6/3  Re .. Wol flux. 27  Re .. W"" .tanor circoi~ 434. 433  Re"Slive .tarler circoit (i_OIl  IDOIOII). 434. 43~  ~ve rotor ... indiog, 493  ~ve ...mding, 492  Reverse_blocking diode ~ype  tbyJisIor, 154  Ripple foctor, 163, 164-166  IOU voltay (~phase ",,"'or~ l'!4  R0001iog loop be1wuo CIlJvM pole  bee.!!, 47J-.U~  R0001iog .... goe1ic C .. ld, 2J8-246  .lec1ricrol frequoer>:y1s
!-d of rotatiOll,  U~  MATLAB prognm, 24~246  "''''''''ing direction. ~6  R0001iog 1nn>formo:r, 386  Roootiomllosse.r, 3~  Roootiomi mot ion. 3-,'1  Rotor, 231. 473  Rotor coils, 490-492  Rotor _ 1o .. (R(1). 261. 662  Rotor reactao::e. 391  Rotor .Up. 386  Rotor windiog., 26/. 492-493  Runa .... y, ~~  Salie., pole, 26/, ~21  Salie.,_poI. machine ., 247  Salient_pol. rotor, 268, 269  Salient_pole symcJ.OIIOUS ll"DOH'or,  728-734  Salient_pole 1beory of .yr>chrnnow  machine .. 727_736  S"' .....
 od .ynd>romo. ",octane., 286  S"' ..... ion curv., 21  S"' ..... ion regiOll, 21  sec, 284  SQ.,261  744 IN D EX  Soou-T~ BI.1l2  SCR.I»-I ~  SCR.- _110< dmoi ... s.r Solid.  >l1II.do_OOIIIroIIo<  .,. '"  .sec-:I.y windi,,&-66  Solf.a>mllllltllliooo ",..run. 19~  Solf-eq .. lillnl windill,l;. ~1. ~2  Solf •• tanial ,duc\ao;:e ~. 66.'1. 666  s.,..r.ltly .""iled do 8"",,,.11,.. ~  oquivol..., c"""~. m _u_ moIy.lli .. ~'111-602  IOnniul ~Iic. ~%-.'I91  .. nniul~. '91-.j911  s.por.lyc.cllOdde -....
 5l11--5l9,  551.Sn_Sbo .. de-.  Series ....... (1.), 100  Series de .--. 6OS-tiiO  SoriOIde~~  ~ •• 564  "', '" ICVLcq.roliaa. ~  .".d 00IIIr0I. 561  .. nnioaJ clIonocIeri.rtia. 563--567  tr>rq .... 561-UJ  torq ... ...".d choncle:ristic. 563-j6,  s.. ... 1Ii_Io, , ... ilUJr. 6lJ. 61 4  s.. ... volt. (Val. 100  s.. ... ..,IIIIi." 100  Setin (lop) wiD<li." 491-4'11  Setin ( ... ..,) wirrdi"50 oI91-.'iOl  Setin ........ too commoo ..... cirail.  189-191  Servioo f ...... , ill  -~~ SIIodi", coil 
~l  ...... , ""'-, SIIoI~f ...... _ ....... 67. 611, 98  Sbor!.a.:u;t clIonocIeri.rlic (SCC), 284  SbcfI.amri1Ilf"leClioo. 433  Sbcfl.amril .. 00, 237  Sbcfl.circuit 10.  .)'t'IOIIr'Dnoo. I ........ 284  hOUf",,,,,, •• 91_92  Sbor!.a.a.;t ~ 321_326  Shortina b" .. 1ock, 142  SborOna " top. J.8O  SborI.-..-"", 6 12  SborI-oenn q>enlioo (.,.~  ........ ).lJ!l  SM .. de ........ , Ii02.-alII  _,..u,6Ci6-MI oqui._ .u.:.;,. 6W  ICVLoquotK.. 6W  IOrmioai ~c, ~  ""'"II" tUl<lIp.l!W--&S  ""'"II" _L 1'10
6  SII.ru de """"""' B8_-l!!9  """lOut. ,..,; ... "'" >peed c"""oI.  '52. HJ  """lOut. vall • .".d <X>II1roI.  "I~n. HJ-.j~  oquivolun c"""~. 538  field mblu<z ..-<>JDroI,  "~I,HW~  iaotrtirls _ ... i • ..;.. ..m  _cirait, 552, 5.'13  ICVLoquoo;... H8  _,_.....".... S(3-5(7  ""'. fodd dmoi~ ~  ..-_. "1--555  .'''''-.1 __ 3.W  IOrmioai ~ 53'1-.S43  lI>rq'M...,...d chooracleriolic. ,S4(I  SI ~oill. 2, 54, 731. Su abo UDiLt ot  ~.- SiIi<oII_1ed recoir.... (SCR~  I»-U6  Sialplocleariccirail. II  Sia
oplo loop I •• oiform ~ field,  »>-m  Siaoplo.lop windi,,&-493  Si.",Io. roIOr windi"ll, 492  Si"",lo. wov ... indi"!l:. ~  Si.!Io-ph .... """.n1 """"'" i""""or.  19S-191  Si.!Io-ph .... I.....,.'" _ .. 637-66.'1  w-pp JIO""OI. 661-M2  copocilor ... .-t ~ 649--6!11  cimr. model. 6S1-6/i!1  atIIII·fodd -,.. 60._645  <Ior.obIwo ........ __ 1d tboay.  .,...,  .......... &.old, ~1-6S9  J'O"'or.flow 1Ii..-fi(j(]  .....". """"'" _. 662  Wcled-p>Io mot<n, 652---M)  """" 0I>I'III'0l. ~ 7 lpIiI.pt>_ .iod
i.lS. 646-648  .lOtIi.l. 646--656  Sin!Io-ph'" 0'I0I0r>, 6JJ  Si.!ly .. cited, 311S  SiJ.pole de """"'. 496  S ....... d ""'" ~or .. 724. 72'1  SL;p, }86  SI;p rinp. :za  SI;p rillP 00<1 tn ...... 268  Slip .pted. JU  Slippiaspola. )$1  SIoI iIInI>ooiao. T.ll-724  SIoI pildL, 11'  Sol\-JWI iIIIioooioro -.. 423  Sol-JWI -.. <t48  Soft ...... propwA Sa MAJLYI  SoIicl-flMo do ..,.." <:OOOoJIo<. ~  block iii ...... 3101]  1O""power .lo<.-IroDic.o 0<0CIi0D, ~  Jow'J'O"'or doolroaiCi JeClioo.  59O-.!l
92  p«>I'<'Iioa ci.",,;, .. cIiOll, ~89  • ...v.1Op dlWit oecIiooo. ~90  ''''''"'l''-v •. ftur.q."d"" ..  _Ior.~  SoIOcWWI in<h<:tlorr __ driVCl,  ~" SoW-mIO v.n.t.Je.h""""1 irrdoctioo  _dri..,.4t4. 0145  SpoQ~n.bmon. 611  Spoo<I. Sn_T~  -..:. ....  K rnodoi_ 26J-.264 _m  C\IIIW.JMi..,ey ......,.,~odod de  rnoIOf.573  de n1OIor •• 5~J5  iO<kl<tiClrl """""'-4l4-444  ...... de rn<JIOD, 561  .i>.lnI de mo«:n. 341-.j~  ....... pIwo IndlOCIX>D_.  "'-'"  . ~ .......... Z72,JZ7  .~ """""-J7l  .... ..,1
'$Il moron . 635  Spot<l drop (SO~ )()l  Spot<l rqulllliorr ( SR~ 2M-264.  "'-'"  Spood .. pIIoIioa cirait. 5\11hS91  Splil.phuo ...,.",.. 646-6411  Spri",.I",. pooh batto • ..;tcbos,  571. 579  Sqo ... low-lOtqooe C<><lJIeCIioro, 438  SR 26J-.:!6-I. 5~1'I  Slobitao<l,i>.lnI _. 5.'19  s-io)', W olli-. ~  ......  de --. 51]..3&2  iao.h><liooo rnoIOI • .tJO-U4  00. do rnaohi ... 37-39. ~2---I7  ""I"<'Iic """'" .!arIo. circoir.  432---1:1-1  ... Uti •• IW'I ... in-u;,. 434. 4J~  oi..p.1"'-i""oC'Iio
oo roo!<Jr.  ...." .,.oo:t.oaooo. _ . J64..J71  $wt"'s cocIo lotIOn, 4]0, 411  S .............. n •  S .............. 0105  SwWtop ciJaril ..."iOG, ~  Srmc ac &e; , :) "",,--.., 19J  SboIi.c .111.,,1)' limit. 2Sl. l<n  St.Ior. 231.'n, 116  Stoia-coil. 1 11  St.Ior <appor _ (SCl.~ 261  St.Ior wifllli .... 261  S .. ody-flOlO f .. _ oarrero:. 124  S .. ody-,oWl period. 32) S"ody-,oWl .,. __  ""' ....... 350-J64  S .. p.do...., MII_f",,,,,,,,. 100. 110  S .. ppo. """"'. 670-674  S"p."I' ,"""""",for
",,, •• 109. 110  Sin)' 1Dooo •• 262, '25  S.,*-iooo InnOtorr... 67  S"""" ..... , .... rot. 11l  S"""" .... '" ponod, 12.l  S"""" .... '" .. ..,,_. 12'1  S,_i<oJ~_l25  S~ copocioors. J64  S~-",l64  S~""""",.267....J45  InohNI.> clCillllioa. 2(il..271  o;::opobiJi!y """"". l29-lM  MOW OY eli.,..... 271. 712  <Ie JIO""OI. 268  dynamic .tabiU,y Urnil. 320  oqu;v"'", d"""~ 27 .... 279  f..,I,.32I-326  froqumcy.,..,... ... b.-riRie,  ""-'"  ~.,~";~ lH  i_ .. __ ......... 773  ... power f...,.. 289. 
290  ftdi .. pCI'IO'« fKoor. 2'10  ......... """" rmpotiuIioa __ 213  IIIOdod J*'MIt ...... 2U-2118  occ.=  ~moi'I .... W  ponJlol opmoIioa. 299..J19. s.. aUo  PonIJd r>p<nIioa of K  1· ... nIIDrO  .,...pIwo <;.i""Io., cirelli,. 278--27'9  p/Ia><r lliovan>. 179-280  pik!Ir .. cit ... 271  po ....... 280-lIJ  power.f1Dw llioparn. 280-2111  "'in,o. 126-JJ6. s.. _  Sr-F-nIiIrp  .-.;.., power ....... """'--iolic.  """'" .ce.,..  ~ ... io.,211  ohr:IIt-ararilleSt. 2&01  ohr:IIt-ararii tna.IIiau. 12J-
--326  .IIi ..... _ opmoIUo,'_,  "'-m  .Iip ri ... ond 1INoha. :za  "*'" ot .01 ...... m  ""ie "abi~1)' ~mil. 282  ay~_.......,..a.  311-312  ay~ ... octanu. 216., 2M. 286  ~2Sl-m  .......... 319-326  ."ty_ &coor. 2ti. 290  '""lias" 113. 321  '""lias' ~ 19O-191  5~..,....wcopobi~I)''''''',  ,"-'"  5~..,....w fIIj .... l26-lJ6  _'" J'C""Of. m  ~.J26...J21  kilo~.ll7  _f""""'.328  .u.,.o..polo Iheofy. 127_136  .. moo fo<Iox lJ5  """'.tin opmItion. JJ5 _m  """"so. 327  S~ grnom" ..... ielllS.  319-
-326  Syacbr""""" ioduclioo moIOf. 665  S~ "'oelIi .... no. Src obo  Sy...m-w grnm.t,,;  Sy...m-w""""  Sy...m-w """Of. J.6-379  OJIOtiloow wi..,;.".lo61-371  buic priociplo of opmItion. J.46  romII'oOI> ~atioc>. J1J  oqoivu.," c"","~ 3017  r .. 1d ....... , <l>uc'" J5S-360  "w._f""""'.loI9.J~  .. 0<1; .. ..,...., r"""",. J52. 362  Imd~ l!II-l!I5  "'"P""'" r .. 1d, :U1-3~  """"Platt. 313  ""' ............. 01 <i_it. ).q  ~ 4iopI>. l49  po ...... ~«mCIiOi. 36O-36l  puIlouI """'"-l!Il  rIliap.. l1W
13  opo«IoI "" .... 313  IP""'I ...as. m  --.. )6.1-311  .....,.._ "",1'IItio». J».J6.I  ay""'-'-apcilor. )6.1  ay""'-'-.-. ~  171-312  ~~~.utic...,... ..  "..",  .odofOu:i .. dIovuucited, l56-l!l7  V < ...... J56  ."""so. 313  S~"""" flljj,,,.11l-l73  S~ _ V C'UtYO. 156  Syacbr""""" 10'''''''Il0l. 276., 28.5  Sya.d>raooopo. MJ-104 Syacbr_d _. 666. 667  Sy"~"" J"' ...... """" (51). 2. 54. 737.  Sr. oIs<J Uoiu cf ...... "'.  T.bIo.oI~ .. u. 737  T"" dw9n8 UIIdef _ (TCl)t.)  ...... &.r"""'.I09  T_
 I08-I09  TCUl.,"",bmoo.l09  T ............... """"',. III  Yrmpe ... _ .... df><a!ioN.~.  Su tJI", ..... 1.;0"  T ......... ~ri,.;<  cumliloti ... ty............-*  ............. 611-613  do&DOd., '19  ~ .. .......,. «IIIl""'-*  .-.-..617  __ I)" aci .. d * poonkO" .  ""'" _* ..... "".6()9...610  _*_.~~1  ..... de paonoor. 005--W6  ..... de -. 539-.S4J Tormiat .... _~_  ~I ....... 10S-J06  yn.,_.,66  Tall (T). 10. 1n  T .... 1'1-. 426  lbonDO! ....,.. ......... 136  n.. ...... iq>tdaa: .. 4(J7 
 n.. ...... ...a..-:. oad 1n<UIII: .. _  n.. ...... · ........... 406  n.. ....... """"So. 401>-4(17  n.c....-Elibu. ~  n.-~JIb<.bolIb IDO!bod, .lO2. Jro  n.-pt..<...rc.iu. 631_106  ........... 631  bot_ !hr .. ~ ')"10 .....  M~~  del .. (.1) <>JODOCt iooo. 688-689  FDOnI ioon of ""ttav ... """" .....  M'~  ~ooIptwe ",mj,io •• 00  "",,·Iine di.~. 700  fb-OOIJOeDOe. 684. 00  _r ,elOliomltipo. 69()...691  _rlri .. sle,.1OO-103  ""1Ia,\IO ... """" ..... 63~  Y COIIDe<:!ion. 68J-688, 689  Y·lo n..f~
 i\93. 69S  11fte.pbooe.......-..,."" i""" .....  197_199  n.-.,t.-fuU-"a", lKlif_. 1m-ITO  'tlfte.pbao paon<m. 611. 682  'tlfte.pbao b&tf_ .. a~ IKli6er. 161--169  'tlfte.pbao PWM iD_. 204  'tlfte.pbao _ . 219  'tlfte.pbao __ -. 6/1  1tfte.pb.oYm :1;"" 131.13)  1tfte.pb.o .... _ (r.o  -..on). 126--133 "",...to __ 126--129  "", ... ..,e; do"'~  IJO--JJI  Sooa_T......-.... Ill. 132  -.......T «> __ 131.132  llfte.pb-. .... _.II6--I26  deb_."""""Clioo., III  dek .. ..,o ~ 121_122  ..... _I)' ... "
'ofmo......,... ...  12J-124  <ypa. 117  y . .1_. 120-121  y.y~"". 118--120  n.-pho>e"""SO IOII(ce invenor.  '~m  n.-"." .. ,i"ive " "'or (in<b:ti""  .-or).4JS  n.-.. ;.. tbyri'<OO . ISS--IS6  ThyTi"<JI  deflDOd.l54  010. 1ST  ....... ;... 1S4--1~  T ......... .,. .. Ia,.. ~loI. 51'9. SAO  Tl:.JOb...-.... 722--124 _.W  '" modIi ..... 211-2lo11. 2'lS--2511  ~......,..~ loop. 2J4.-23II .., __ ~:z. 511h'111  '"'""' ,  <k~Joped. JII8  _~.400.~1  INDEX 745  ildKtioo. _ . 184-38!1. 39&,  «11,,(13  ...
 Ilooot. Su ......,.. .....,...  ...-~ 0160, <161  rnJ "" _. 2J1_llS  ~~~121  .aIioOI-f"*.....::biDe. 7J.t-13'  ...... '" .,---11"_ 2I2-2IJ ., ____ .331  _01",,-..5.137  T<Y<pIO ..... lSl. 213  T~~"  _iIor ...... ~1Or .....  _.M1  capoci<oo ..... _. 650  rumnIoIivolJ.",..",..odod de .... Of. ....,'"  diffeuolioJly """"""",d de moIOI.  57O.,S11  by......,;. moIOI. 668. 669  io<i><ti"" moclIi ... 461  io<i><ti"" m<It<f, 401-4)6  1"""WI<o, .1p~'-<,opoci,,,,,...-.. 651  ..If"'''''i,. .. 11I<\aIQ """
"". 66/  ",ie. de IrO)IOr" ~  .bodod.poIo m<It<f. 6;S4  .b"", de moon. 540  .i.&lt.p/lAoo i_oo _. 639.  ""M' .pli<.pt..< _. 6017  .ytd>rooolw _. )~51  ~i-"'_.640  uniwroal _. 616  Too .. aalMioo """"at. 8)  Trudamos ,65-151  .......... _ ....... I)8..J19  __ ~ 109-II6.,Su.,J,.,  ~  ""'"' f ...... 6/  ...,., ... 141_142  ~'"imlHb.ll9-loIO  <kr,.",  diMibuoioo., 6/  offia...cy. 100  eqoi.uOl...rc.it. IJ6..9.I  ~""'I-I~  idoooL 61-'M. Sff ... kIoal  .......  i~66  i ..... _ ... 141)..1.2  _.102  ""
;n. III  umop b ... 14Q 141  " . ,.iI ... " 9(1..9)  por.uni! .y ... m of ............... "'. 94  phaooo diosr-100-10;  p" •• Ii.lI41  1""_.66  raliOjS, 134-139  ... l 16-M. Su ~..., R .oJ InIUfor .... '  """i." :lS6 .boll f<JIm. 6/. 68  .t.<.t.ciKui, ..... 91-92  "tp-op. 109, 110  .ubo!o!ioo., 6/  ' ..... 108-109  =C,"  _.1lI  ~ 116-126. SfftJI",n.r..  -_ ....  -.....~(, - ......ror-..). 116-13). s.....s.o  ~ ..-...f<noIMj<ll (r.o  ......... ,  ....,~  .............. 134  746 INDEX  Trmsf",,...
.-Con<  voIIage .. gul"'ion. 100-101  Trmsf",,.... actiO<l, 8  Trmsf",,.... ID<XIeI of i_OIl moIor,  ,~~  Trmsf",,.... ...... pl"'., 140, 141  Trmsf",,.... opoD _drcuil' •• ~ 90---91  Trmsf",,....pbasordiagnm, 100-101  Trmsf",,.... "lings, 134-139  Trmsf",,.... ohon-<ircui" .... , 91_92  Trmsf",,....,aps. 108-109  Tr>Mion1 <UrrOD1, 324  T ...... .,. period, 323  T ...... .,. re:o::w.::o, 3~  T ...... " or  IOBT, 161_ 162  PTR, 160  TRIAC. 1~8-1~9  Trigor dioo.. 154  Tr~e ideotiti ... , 6&4, 690 
 Trip"" barmoni<:.r, 714  Triplex willdi"-l, 493  Tor", ratio, 69  Two-byer...u.dings.491  Two-polo bp-_do:: rnachlno, 494  Two-polo .oy~. molar, 347  T~ ootid_ ..... do:: """or  CO<lrrnl .... , ~ 8~  Two-value capaci'or motor" MIl  Two-wi .. thyri"or, 1~4- I~~  U~Ddod,6lJ  Undoorvol1log. protectiOll, 434  Undoorvol1loS' rrip, ~89  Uniformly gndod (occOJlrric) po .... ,  ~D. ~21  Unir 1nD>f"'''''>r, 6/  Uni .. ot .... :.s"..  angular :lCcolonilioo, 4  angular voloc!'y, 3---4  'WM01I' _er, 50  <X
>llvorsioo (""or., 737  .locIrical qw.owic., 54  English .nits, 2, ~3  llux linbS" 31  magnet ic field doruiry, 10  magnet ic flux doruiry, 10  magnetomotivo foR:o, II  por ..... biliry, 10  l""""'r,7  reocrivo l""""'r, 49  real power, 48  SI .nits. 2, 54  ,oblo of """" .... , 737  'orquo, ~  •• u  Uni'y power (ocror, 2l!9, 290  Univor..J """or, 634--f;36  U ... 1l1r1IIod rogiOll, 21  U ... 1l1r1IIod .oy~ ... actaoc., 286  VI<> I~~  V e,l09  V .. 110  V,,110  V .. ' 109  "--.)'1>CIror>ow eapocir
o, 364  .)'1>CIror>ow """or, 3~  Varioble-freqo>on::y Cfclooorrv.:" .r, 200  Varioble-line-vol1loS' • .,-1 <:O<I1ro1  (inWcriorr motor ). 443  Varioble-vol1loS' aur"" .... formor, II~  "oo ~  II<: rnachlno .. 233, 230-~~  II<:p/>asoconroL 177_ 186  . mat .... ">C1ioo, 276  coil orr tw<>-poIo .tator, 250-~3  ~'OO  C<>Dth>ctor movloS i. magDOlic f .. ld,  ~,  cwmJatjvoly compoW><lod de  !l"DOn'or, 611. 614  dcmoo:bi ..... 47~---480, ~IWI6  -<I. COIIDOCI ioo, 688-689  diftoroJlrially ~d de  !l"DOn'
or, 617  disrriburod...u.dings,721_722  fncriOllllI_pi'cb coil 709-712  i_OIl """or,443, 46~  lCVL Sa till_·, voIIage la ...  PN,I54  .. activo_power _ vol,>-y cl1lonocleruric,  W~  ... Ioe machino.<, 233  rms vohg. (rhne_phaso " "'or). 254  >epanIOly .xciled de SOllOrator,  ~97~98  soric., 100  .t.rnr de SOllOrator, 603---60:'!, 606  .~Io """rioS loop. 2J 1_233  .)'1>CIror>ow gonontor, 273, 327  .)'1>CIror>ow """or, 3Tl  Thovenio, 406-407  three--pIw>o circuil, ~  three--pIw>o .., of coil~ ~3  
rnnsform ... ,I34  Y oonoocUOII, 685---68Il  Vo/rage Wi]Wp (shlUl' S.,..nllor).  ~  Vo/rage dividoor rul., 406  Vo/rage nllio ocross . lnMf",,...., 78-80  Vol,,,!!,, .. gub'ioo (VR)  oe Dl:lCbino.s, 262-263  full_lood, 100  .oy~. !l"DOn,or., 290-291  1r1mSf"""",,", 100  Volr"!!,, "gub ,or, 109  Volr"!!""",,,,co illVOnor (VSl), I~, 196,  199-202  VR. Su Vo/rage rogulariO<l (VR )  VSI. I~, 196, 199--W2  V _VoonooC1ioo, 126-129  Word _l=nard 'y'lOm, ~83~8~  W.D (W). 737  W.v • .,;00;"8, 497---5()1 
 W.ber (Vr'b), 737  Wlodago los .... 262, ~2'!  Wllldi"-l  oe macbino.s, 250, 2~~  omorIir..-or, 36/--.l71  lIrDIlI'uro, 267,492-493  <:borded, 491. 700  0JIIIID0Il,109  <:OIIIpO""ory. ~IWlJ  darnpor,36/--.l71  di.rriOOrod, 716-7~  doublo-l'yo:r,491. 718  'quolizio.'!, 494. 496, 498  f .. ld,267  fr>Ctioool_pircb,249,712-716  froS-IoS, 501---502  b p,493---497  rwlripl. ""or, 438  pimory, 66  pogre"ivo,492  _ogre .. ivo. 492  rot",,492---493  .. cor><lory, 66  .. rio .. 109  '011i.,., 66  'wo-b 
yor, 491. 718  W .vo, 497..j()1  Wllldi"-l foctor, 721  Wllldi"-l ;""'b riOll, ~8-260  -,  wo.u.d NO or, 382, 383  wo.u.d_rotor inWcrioa .-or, 382--384  Wyo (Y ) oonoocUorr,~, 689  Wyo-dol,. (Y -.1J <:OIIDOCI:iOll, 120-121  Wyo -wyo (Y-Y ) COIIDOCI ion. 118-120  Y oormocUorr, 685---68Il, 689  Y _-<I. <:OIIDOCI:iOll, 120-121  Y _-<l.1r1mSformatioo, 693, 69~  Yoke. ~19, ~21  Y -Y COIIDOCI ion. 118-120   Higher Education  http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072465239  The Online Learning Center 
(OLC) provides students with  activities to further explore topics presented within the book  and ensure a successful grade for the course.  Activities may include:  • interactive quizzes  • Internet links to related materials  • animations  • flashcards  • additional readings  • answers to selected end-of-chapter questions  • a career center  Instructors will also appreciate how the OLC's library of  teaching aids and compatibility with course management  systems, including WebCT , BlackBoard, 
PageOut , and  eColiege, make life a little easier.  The McGraw'HiII Companies  
